Project Gutenberg's A Short System of English Grammar, by Henry Bate

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Short System of English Grammar
       For the Use of the Boarding School in Worcester (1759)

Author: Henry Bate

Release Date: October 22, 2008 [EBook #26991]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SHORT SYSTEM OF ENGLISH GRAMMAR ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Lindy Walsh and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






A

Short _System_

OF

English GRAMMAR.


For the use of the

BOARDING SCHOOL

In WORCESTER.



_By_ HENRY BATE _A. B._



_Worcester:_ Printed by R. LEWIS,
Bookseller, in _High-Street_.




THE PREFACE.


_Usage and Custom are the Rules and Measures of every_ Language, _and
the Rules of_ GRAMMAR _have nothing more to do, than to teach it. The_
GRAMMAR _is to be fashioned from the particular_ Language, _it treats
of, and not the Language from the_ GRAMMAR. _For want of following this
regular Plan, our Modern_ GRAMMARIANS_ have introduced the_ GRAMMAR
Rules _of other_ Languages _into their own; as if all_ Language _was
founded on_ GRAMMAR, _and the Rules in one_ Language _would serve the
same End and Purpose in another._

The Latin, _for Instance, has only_ eight Parts of Speech, _and the
Writers of_ English GRAMMAR _have unthinkingly adopted the same Number;
whereas with the Article, which the_ Latin _has not, and which is of
great Service in a_ Language, _we have no less than nine. The_ Latin
_admits of_ Cases; _but as different_ Cases, _properly speaking, are
nothing more than the different Inflections and Terminations of Nouns_,
English Nouns _have no_ Cases. _It is not agreeable to the Principles
of_ GRAMMAR _to say that_--of a Rose--_is the Genitive Case of_--Rose,
_or_--to a Rose, _the Dative; for_ of _and_ to _are no Part of the
Word_ Rose, _but only_ prefix Particles _or_ Prepositions, _which shew
the different Relation of the Word_ Rose. _So likewise when we say_
Alexander's Horse, _the Word_ Alexander's _is not the Genitive Case of_
Alexander; _for strictly speaking the_ 's _is no Part of the Word_
Alexander _but the final Letter of the Pronoun Possessive_ his, _and
without the_ Apostrophe _we shou'd read it thus;_ Alexander his Horse.
_If any of the_ Parts of Speech _have_ Cases, _the_ Pronouns _have, and
some of the_ Pronouns _may perhaps have_ two; _but for the Sake of
making every Thing as easy as I can to the Learner, I have taken the
Liberty of distinguishing such_ Pronouns _into_ Prefix _and_
Subsequent, _and entirely laid aside_ Cases _as useless and
unnecessary. The_ Latin _has_ Genders, _the_ Adjective _in that
Language always varying to correspond with the_ Substantive; _but
our_Adjectives _never vary, and therefore the Distinction of_ Genders
_has nothing to do with_ English GRAMMAR, _but is idle, trifling,
impertinent._

EXPERIENCE _shews, that this Sort of pedantick Ignorance and Folly, has
made that dark and obscure, which it was intended to elucidate, and
unhappily puzzled and perplexed a great many more, than it has ever
instructed. Every attempt to make_ English easy _must be fruitless,
that is not formed upon a different Plan, and such is the following_
short System of English GRAMMAR.




A
Short _System_
OF
English GRAMMAR.




_Of_ GRAMMAR _and it's_ DIVISIONS.


Grammar is the Science of Letters or Language, and is the Art of
Speaking and Writing properly.

It's Divisions are four;

ORTHOGRAPHY        ANALOGY
PROSODY            SYNTAX


_Of_ ORTHOGRAPHY.

Orthography comprehends _Writing_, and _Articulation_. _Articulation_
treats of Simple Sounds, which are made by the Organs of Speech, and by
which we communicate our Ideas and Sentiments to one another. _Writing_
represents the Living Speech, and makes as it were these Sounds and
Sentiments visible.


_Of_ PROSODY.

Prosody treats of Pronunciation with respect of _Accent_, _Time_, and
_Quantity_. But as the Science of Letters, Sounds, and Pronunciation is
instilled into the Minds of the English Youth very early in Life, and
as this GRAMMAR is not intended for the Use of _Foreigners_, but for
them; I shall not trifle away their Time, in teaching them, what they
cannot be supposed to be unacquainted with; but proceed to the third
Part of GRAMMAR called _Analogy_.


_Of_ ANALOGY.

Analogy is the mutual Relation, or Agreement of Words with one another,
and treats of all the _Parts of Speech_, which in English are _nine_.

_Article_    _Verb_          _Conjunction_
_Noun_       _Participle_    _Preposition_
_Pronoun_    _Adverb_        _Interjection_


_Of An_ ARTICLE.

An Article is a _Part of Speech_ put before _Nouns_ to ascertain and
fix their Vague Signification. There are three Articles, _a_, _an_, and
_the_. _A_ and _an_ are Indefinite Articles and applied to Persons or
Things indifferently; as _an Oyster_, _a Prince_. The Article _the_
distinguishes individually or particularly; as _the Oyster_, _the
Prince_.


_Of a_ NOUN.

A Noun is a _Part of Speech_ which expresses the Subject spoke of; as
_Ink_, _Paper_, _Witness._

A Noun is either _Substantive_, or _Adjective_.

A Noun _Substantive_ is the Name of a Thing considered simply in
itself, and without any Regard to it's Qualities; as _a Man_, _a
Woman_, _a Child_.


A Noun _Adjective_ is a Word added to the _Noun Substantive_,
expressing the Circumstance or Quality thereof; as _a good Man_, _an
old Woman_, _a young Child_.


_Of a_ PRONOUN.

A Pronoun is a _Part of Speech_ substituted in the Place of a _Noun_,
to avoid the frequent and disagreeable Repetition of the same Word; as
_the Bird_ is joyous, _he_ chirps, _he_ sings; which without the
_Pronoun_ wou'd be thus; _the Bird_ is joyous, _the Bird_ chirps, _the
Bird _ sings.

PRONOUNS PERSONAL.

_I_       _He_            _Myself_      _I myself_
_Me_      _Him_           _Yourself_    _You yourself_
_You_     _She_           _Thyself_     _Thou thyself_
_Thou_    _Her_           _Himself_     _He himself_
_Thee_    _One's self_    _Herself_     _She herself_

PRONOUNS RELATIVE.

_Who_, _whose_, _whom_, _what_, _which._

PRONOUNS DEMONSTRATIVE.

_This_, _that._

PRONOUNS POSSESSIVE.

_My_      _Ours_     _Your_     _Theirs_
_Mine_    _Thy_      _Yours_    _Her_
_Our_     _Thine_    _His_      _Hers_


_Of_ NUMBER.

Number expresses the Difference betwixt one Thing and many, and is
either _Singular_ or _Plural_.

When a Thing is considered as single, or a Multitude of Things
considered as united together, it is of the _Singular Number_; as _a
Man_, _a Troop_.

When several Things are considered as distinct from each other it is of
the _Plural Number_, as _Men_, _Soldiers_.

The _Plural_ is usually formed in _Noun Substantives_ by adding _s_ to
the _Singular_; as _Article Articles_, _Noun Nouns_.

But when the Pronunciation requires it, or when the _Singular_ ends in
_s_, _x_, _sh_, or _ch_, the _Plural_ is usually formed by adding the
Syllable _es_; as _Ass Asses_, _Fox Foxes_, _Sash Sashes_, _Church
Churches_.

When the _Singular_ ends in _f_ or _fe_, the _Plural_ is usually form'd
by changing the _f_ or _fe_ into _ves_; as _Wife Wives_, _Self Selves_.

Sometimes the _Plural_ is formed by adding the Syllable _en_; as _Ox
Oxen_; sometimes by changing the _Vowel_; as _Man Men_; and sometimes
the _Vowels and Consonants_; as _Penny Pence_, _Mouse Mice_, _Louse
Lice_.

Some of the _Pronouns_ form their _Plural_ very irregular; as _I We_,
_Me Us_, _Thou Ye_, _Thee You_, _He They_, _Him Them_, _She They_, _Her
Them_.

Some _Nouns_ have no _Singular Number_; as _Scissors_, the
_East-Indies_, the _West-Indies_.

Some have no _Plural_; the Names of Kingdoms for Instance; as
_England_, _Ireland_, _Portugal_.

Cities, Towns and Villages; as _Worcester_, _Kinver_, _Hagley_.

Seas, and Rivers; as the _Mediterranean_, _Severn_.

_Wheat_, _Barley_, _Gold_, _Silver_, _Pewter_, and a great many Words,
that cannot be reduced to any Rule want the _Plural Number_; as _Ale_,
_Beer_, _Bread_, _Butter_, _Honey_, _Milk_, _Hunger_, _Thirst_,
_Drunkenness_.

The Termination of some _Nouns_ is the same both in the _Singular_ and
_Plural_; as _a Sheep_, _a Swine_, a Flock of _Sheep_, a Herd of
_Swine_, &c.


_Of_ COMPARISON.

Comparison is the comparing the different Circumstances of Persons or
Things with each other, and serves to alter the Signification of a
Word, either by a gradual Increase, or a gradual Diminution; as _long
longer longest_, _short shorter shortest_.

ADJECTIVES, _Adverbs_, and _Substantives_, have three Degrees of
Comparison, the _Positive_, the _Comparative_, and the _Superlative_.

The _Positive_ lays down the Natural Signification simply and without
excess or Diminution; as _long_, _short_, _often_.

The _Comparative_ raises or lowers the _Positive_ in Signification, and
is formed of the _Positive_ by adding the Syllable _er_; as _long
longer_, _short shorter_, _often oftener_.

The _Superlative_ raises or lowers the Signification as much as
possible, and if formed of the _Positive_ by adding the Syllable _est_;
as _long longest_, _short shortest_, _often oftenest_.

Sometimes they are compared by the _Adverbs_ _very, infinitely_; and
the _Adjectives_ _more, most_; _less, least_; as _long, very long,
infinitely long_; _short, more short, most short_; _commonly, less
commonly, least commonly_.

These _Adjectives_ deviate from the general Rule, _good better best_,
_bad worse worst_, _little less least_, _much more most_.

SUBSTANTIVES are compared by the _Adjectives_ _more, most_, the Words
_than_, or _that_, always following; as a Dunce, _more_ a Dunce _than_
I or me, the _most_ a Dunce _that_ ever I did see.


_Of a_ VERB.

A Verb is a _Part of Speech_, which serves to express, what we affirm
of, or attribute to any Subject, and is either _Active_ or _Passive_.

A Verb _Active_ is that which expresses an _Action_; as _I kick_, _I
see_.

A Verb _Passive_ is that which receives the _Action_ or expresses the
_Passion_; as _I am kick'd_, _I am seen_.

A Verb has two _Numbers_ the _Singular_ and the _Plural_; and three
_Persons_ in each _Number_; as _I am, thou art, he is_. _We are, ye
are, they are._

The same is to be observed in every _Mood_ and in every _Tense_ but in
the _Infinitive_, which has neither _Number_ nor Person.


_Of_ MOODS.

A mood is the Manner of _conjugating Verbs_ agreeably to the different
Actions or Affections to be expressed.

There are _four Moods_, the _Indicative_, the _Imperative_, the
_Conjunctive_, and the _Infinitive._

The _Indicative Mood_ expresseth the _Action_ or _Passion_ simply
directly and absolutely; as _I love, I have loved, I will love_.

The _Imperative_ commands or forbids; as _come_, _go_, _begone_.

The _Conjunctive_ expresses the _Action_ or _Passion_ conditionally and
is always joined with the _Indicative_, or the same _Mood_; as _I will
love you, if you wou'd love me_; _I wou'd dance, if you wou'd dance_.

The _Infinitive_ expresses the _Action_ or _Passion_ indeterminately
without any Regard to _Time_, _Place_, _Number_, or _Person_; as _to
love, to be loved_.


_Of the_ TENSES.

Tense is an Inflection of Verbs, whereby they are made to signify, and
distinguish the Circumstance of _Time_.

There are _five Tenses_, _the Present Tense_, _the Preterimperfect_,
_the Preterperfect_, _the Preterpluperfect_, and _the Future_.

1. The _Present Tense_ expresses the Time, that now is; as _I sup_.

2. The _Preterimperfect Tense_ denotes the historical Relation of a
past Action, but yet not perfectly compleated, when joined to another
Action that is perfectly compleated; as _when or while I supped he came
in_.

3. The _Preterperfect Tense_ expresses the Time Past perfectly; as _I
have supped_.

4. The _Preterpluperfect Tense_ expresses the Time Past doubly; as _I
had supped_.

5. The _Future Tense_ expresses the Time to come; as _I shall sup, I
will sup_.


_Of the_ CONJUGATION.

Conjugation is the Variation of Verbs through all their _Moods and
Tenses_; and the English Verbs are chiefly conjugated by _auxiliary
Signs_; as _to love_; or by _auxiliary Verbs_; as _I am loved, I have
loved_.


_Of the_ AUXILIARY SIGNS.

The _auxiliary Signs_ are Words that serve to express the Variations of
the _Verb_.

The _Imperative Mood_ has the _Signs_ _do, let_; as--_do thou love, let
him love_.

The _Infinitive Mood_ has the _Signs_ _to, about_; as _to love, about
to love_.

The other _Moods_ have the _auxiliary Signs_ following.

_Singular_

1st _Person_ { I do, did, must, may,
             { can, might, wou'd, cou'd,
             { shou'd, shall, _or_ will.

2d _Person_  { Thou do'st, did'st, must,
             { may'st, can'st, might'st,
             { wou'd'st, cou'd'st, shou'd'st,
             { shalt _or_ wilt.

3d _Person_  { He does, or do'th, did, must,
             { may, can, might, wou'd,
             { cou'd, shou'd, shall, _or_
             { will.

_Plural_

1st _Person_ { We do, did, must, may,
             { can, might, wou'd, cou'd,
             { shou'd, shall, _or_ will.

2d _Person_  { Ye do, did, must, may,
             { can, might, wou'd, cou'd,
             { shou'd, shall _or_ will.

3d _Person_  { They do, did, must, may,
             { can, might, wou'd, cou'd,
             { shou'd, shall _or_ will.


_Of the_ AUXILIARY VERBS.

The _auxiliary Verbs_ are only two, _to Have_ and _to Be_; which cannot
be conjugated without the _auxiliary Signs_, and without the reciprocal
Assistance of each other.

_To HAVE._

INDICATIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense._

_Sing._ I have; thou hast; he hath, _or_ has. _Plur._ We have; ye have;
they have.

_Preterimperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I had; thou hadst; he had. _Plur._ We had; ye had; they had.

_Preterperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I have had; thou hast had; he hath, _or_ has had. _Plur._ We
have had; ye have had; they have had.

_Preterpluperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I had had; thou hadst had; he had had. _Plur._ We had had; ye
had had; they had had.

_Future Tense._

_Sing._ I shall, or will have; thou shalt, or wilt have; he shall, _or_
will have. _Plur._ We shall, _or_ will have; ye shall, _or_ will have;
they shall, _or_ will have.

IMPERATIVE MOOD.

_Present_ and _Future_.

_Sing._ Let me have; do thou have, _or_ have thou; let him have.
_Plur._ Let us have; do ye have, _or_ have ye; let them have.

CONJUNCTIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense._

_Sing._ I may, _or_ can have; thou may'st, _or_ can'st have; he may,
_or_ can have.

_Plur._ We may, _or_ can have; ye may, or can have; they may, _or_ can
have.

_Preterimperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have; thou must,
might'st, woud'st, coud'st, _or_ shoud'st have; he must, might, wou'd,
cou'd, _or_ shou'd have. _Plur._ We must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_
shou'd have; ye must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have; they must,
might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have.

_Preterperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had; thou must,
might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st have had; he must, might,
wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had. _Plur._ We must, might, wou'd,
cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had; ye must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd
have had; they must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had.

_Preterpluperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd had had; thou must,
might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st had had; he must, might,
wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd had had; _Plur._ We must, might, wou'd,
cou'd, _or_ shou'd had had; ye must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd
had had; they must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd had had.

_Future Tense._

_Sing._ I shall, _or_ will have had; thou shalt, _or_ wilt have had; he
shall, _or_ will have had; _Plur._ We shall, _or_ will have had; ye
shall, _or_ will have had; they shall, _or_ will have had.

INFINITIVE MOOD.

_Present_ ---- to have
_Perfect_ ---- to have had
_Future_ ---- about to have.

PARTICIPLES.

_Present_ ---- having
_Preterperfect_ ---- having had.


_To BE._

INDICATIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense._

_Sing._ I am; thou art; he is. _Plur._ We are; ye are; they are.

_Preterimperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I was; thou wast; he was; _Plur._ We were; ye were; they were.

_Preterperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I have been; thou hast been; he hath been. _Plur._ We have
been; ye have been; they have been.

_Preterpluperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I had been; thou hadst been; he had been. _Plur._ We had been;
ye had been; they had been.

_Future Tense._

_Sing._ I shall, _or_ will be; thou shalt, _or_ wilt be; he shall, _or_
will be. _Plur._ We shall, _or_ will be; ye shall, _or_ will be; they
shall, _or_ will be.

IMPERATIVE MOOD.

_Present_ and _Future_.

_Sing._ Let me be; do thou be, _or_ be thou; let him be. _Plur._ Let us
be; do ye be, _or_ be ye; let them be.

CONJUNCTIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense._

_Sing._ I may, _or_ can be; thou may'st, _or_ canst be; he may, _or_
can be. _Plur._ We may, _or_ can be; ye may, _or_ can be; they may,
_or_ can be.

_Preterimperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd be; thou must,
might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st be; he must, might, wou'd,
cou'd, _or_ shou'd be. _Plur._ We must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_
shou'd be; ye must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd be; they must,
might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd be.

_Preterperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have been; thou must,
might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st have been; he must, might,
wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd, have been. _Plur._ We must, might, wou'd,
cou'd, _or_ shou'd have been; ye must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd
have been; they must, might, wou'd cou'd, _or_ shou'd have been.

_Preterpluperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had been; thou
must, might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st, have had been; he
must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had been. _Plur._ We must,
might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had been; ye must, might, wou'd,
cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had been; they must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_
shou'd have had been.

_Future Tense._

_Sing._ I shall, _or_ will have been; thou shalt, _or_ wilt have been;
he shall _or_ will have been. _Plur._ We shall, _or_ will have been; ye
shall, _or_ will have been; they shall, _or_ will have been.

INFINITIVE MOOD.

_Present_ ---- to be
_Preterperfect_ ---- to have been
_Future_ ---- about to be.

PARTICIPLES.

_Present_ ---- being
_Preterperfect_ ---- having been.


_Of_ REGULAR VERBS.

Regular _Verbs_ are those that are _conjugated_ by some established
Rules.

The _Termination_ of the _Infinitive Mood Present Tense, of the Verb
Active, in regular Verbs_, is always the same as the _first Person_ of
the _Indicative Mood Present Tense singular_; as _to love, I love_.

The _Termination_ of the _second Person Singular_ is formed out of the
_first_ by adding _st_ or _est_; as _I love, thou loves_t; _I read,
thou readest_.

The _Termination_ of the _third Person singular_ is formed out of the
_first_ by adding _th_ or _eth_; as _I love, he loveth, I read, he
readeth_; or only by adding _s_; as _he loves, he reads_.

The _Termination_ of the _first Person Preterimperfect Tense singular_,
is formed out of the _first Person Present Tense singular_ by adding
the Syllable _ed_; as _I love, I loved_.

The _Termination_ of the _Participle Present of the Verb Active_, is
always formed out of the _first Person Present_ by adding the Syllable
_ing_; as _I love_, _loving_.

The _Termination_ of the _Preterimperfect, the Preterperfect, and the
Preterpluperfect of the Indicative Mood; and the Preterperfect, the
Preterpluperfect and the Future of the Conjunctive, and the Participle
Passive_ is in regular Verbs the same; as _I loved, I have loved, I had
loved, I may have loved, I might have loved, I shall have loved, I am
loved_. And

The _Termination_ of every other _Tense, Number or Person_, is the same
with the _Infinitive_.


_Of a_ VERB ACTIVE.

A Verb _Active regular_ is conjugated by the _auxiliary Signs, the
auxiliary Verbs_, and the general Rules foregoing.

_To LOVE._

INDICATIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense._

_Sing._ I love, _or_ do love; thou lovest, _or_ dost love; he loveth,
_or_ loves, _or_ doth love. _Plur._ We love, _or_ do love; ye love,
_or_ do love; they love, _or_ do love.

_Preterimperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I loved, _or_ did love; thou loved'st, _or_ did'st love; he
loved, _or_ did love. _Plur._ we loved, _or_ did love; ye loved, _or_
did love; they loved, _or_ did love.

_Preterperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I have loved; thou hast loved; he hath loved, _or_ has loved.
_Plur._ We have loved; ye have loved; they have loved.

_Preterpluperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I had loved; thou hadst loved; he had loved. _Plur._ We had
loved; ye had loved; they had loved.

_Future Tense._

_Sing._ I shall, _or_ will love; thou shalt, _or_ wilt love; he shall,
_or_ will love. _Plur._ We shall, _or_ will love; ye shall, _or_ will
love; they shall, _or_ will love.

IMPERATIVE MOOD.

_Present_ and _Future_.

_Sing._ Let me love; do thou love, _or_ love thou; let him love.
_Plur._ Let us love; do ye love, _or_ love ye; let them love.

CONJUNCTIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense._

_Sing._ I may, _or_ can love; thou may'st, or can'st love; he may, _or_
can love. _Plur._ We may, _or_ can love; ye may, _or_ can love; they
may, _or_ can love.

_Preterimperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd love; thou must,
might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st love; he must, might,
wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd love. _Plur._ We must, might, wou'd, cou'd,
_or_ shou'd love; ye must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd love; they
must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd love.

_Preterperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have loved; thou must,
might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st have loved; he must,
might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have loved. _Plur._ We must, might,
wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have loved; ye must, might, wou'd, cou'd,
_or_ shou'd have loved; they must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd
have loved.

_Preterpluperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had loved; thou
must, might'st, wou'd'st, cou'd'st, _or_ shou'd'st have had loved; he
must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had loved. _Plur._ We must,
might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had loved; ye must, might, wou'd,
cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had loved; they must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_
shou'd have had loved.

_Future Tense._

_Sing._ I shall, _or_ will have loved; thou shalt, _or_ wilt have
loved; he shall, or will have loved. _Plur._ We shall, _or_ will have
loved; ye shall, _or_ will have loved; they shall, _or_ will have
loved.

INFINITIVE MOOD.

_Present_ ---- to love
_Preterperfect_ ---- to have loved
_Future_ ---- about to love.

PARTICIPLES.

_Present_ ---- loving
_Preterperfect_ ---- having loved.


_Of a_ VERB PASSIVE.

The _Verb Passive_ is nothing more than the _Participle Passive_ joined
to the _Auxiliary Verb to be_; as

INDICATIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense_ I am loved; _&c._
_Preterimperfect_ I was loved; _&c._
_Preterperfect_ I have been loved; _&c._
_Preterpluperfect_ I had been loved; _&c._
_Future_ I shall or will be loved; _&c._

IMPERATIVE MOOD.

_Present_ and _Future_. Let me be loved _&c._

CONJUNCTIVE MOOD.

_Present Tense._

_Sing._ I may, _or_ can be loved; thou _&c._

_Preterimperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd be loved; thou _&c._

_Preterperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have been loved; thou
_&c._

_Preterpluperfect Tense._

_Sing._ I must, might, wou'd, cou'd, _or_ shou'd have had been loved;
thou _&c_.

_Future Tense._

_Sing._ I shall, _or_ will have been loved; thou _&c._

INFINITIVE MOOD.

_Present_ ---- to be loved
_Preterperfect_ ---- to have been loved
_Future_ ---- about to be loved.

PARTICIPLES.

_Present_ ---- being loved
_Preterperfect_ ---- having been loved.


_Of a_ PARTICIPLE.

A Participle is a _Part of Speech_, which partaketh of a _Verb_ and a
_Noun_. When it has a Relation to Time it may be considered as a
_Verb_; but when it is joined to a _Substantive_ or admits of
_Comparison_, it may be considered as an _Adjective_.

When the _termination_ of the _Participle Passive_ is not formed by
adding the Syllable _ed_ to the _first Person_ of the _Indicative Mood
Present Tense Singular_; or when the _Termination_ of the _Participle
Passive_ differs from the _Termination of the Preter Tenses_, the
_Verb_ becomes _irregular_; but in all other Respects is conjugated as
the regular Verb; as I abide, thou abidest, &c.

_Pres. Tense._     _Preter._     _Participle Passive._

     Abide           Abode               Abode
     Bite            Bit                 Bitten
     Catch           Caught              Catched
     Do              Did                 Done
     Eat             Eat                 Eaten
     Fall            Fell                Fallen
     Get             Got                 Gotten
     Hold            Held                Holden
     Know            Knew                Known
     Lie             Lay                 Laid
     Make            Made                Made
     Rise            Rose                Risen
     Shine           Shone               Shined
     Tread           Trod                Trodden
     Weave           Wove                Woven
     _&c._           _&c._               _&c._

To these may be added the _Auxiliary Verbs_ ---- _To Have, and to Be_.


_Of an_ ADVERB.

An Adverb is a _Part of Speech_ joined to a _Verb_, a _Noun Substantive_,
an _Adjective_ or _Participle_, and sometimes to another _Adverb_, to
express the Manner or Circumstance of the Thing signified; as _he
speaks properly_, _an orderly Man_, _truly good_, _extreamly loving_,
_very devoutly_.

Adverbs are very numerous, and have Relation to

Time; as _now_, _lately_, _always_.

Place; as _here_, _there_, _no-where_.

Order; as _by Turns_, _abreast_, _orderly_.

Quantity; as _enough_, _more_, _entirely_.

Number; as _once_, _twice_, _thrice_.

Dobting; as _perhaps_, _may be_, _peradventure_.

Asking; as _why?_ _whence?_ _wherefore?_.

Affirmation; as _yes_, _indeed_, _certainly_.

Negation; as _no_, _never_, _not at all_.

Comparison; as _more_, _less_, _likewise_.

Quality; as _justly_, _prudently_, _indifferently_.


_Of a_ CONJUNCTION.

A Conjunction is _a Part of Speech_, which serves to connect and join
the several Parts of a Discourse together, and is of various Kinds.

Copulative; _as and_, _also_, _moreover_.

Disjunctive; _as or_, _neither_, _whether_.

Adversative; _as but_, _yet_, _notwithstanding_.

Conditional; _as if_, _unless_, _provided_.

Casual; _as for_, _because_, _forasmuch_.

Conclusive; _as then_, _so that_, _therefore_.


_Of a_ PREPOSITION.

A Preposition is _a Part of Speech_, that serves to express the
particular Relation and Circumstance of some other _Part of Speech_,
and is either used in _Apposition_, as _in Heaven_; or in
_Composition_, as _Invisible_.

PREPOSITIONS _used in_ APPOSITION.

Above        between        of
about        betwixt        on
after        beyond         over
against      by             through
among        for            throughout
amongst      from           towards
at           in             under
before       into           unto
behind       near           upon
beneath      near to        with
below        nigh           within
beside       nigh to        without.

PREPOSITIONS _used in_ COMPOSITION.

A-base                ap-point
ab-use                as-certain
abs-tract             at-taint
ac-commodate          be-friend
ad-apt                circum-ambient
af-fix                co-adjutor
after-noon            com-pound
amphi-theatre         com-plot
ante-date             con-strain
anti-christ           contra-diction
an-archy              counter-balance.
de-camp               op-pression
Dis-appoint           over-reach
dif-fusive            out-landish
di-minish             per-form
e-mission             post-master
em-brace              pre-eminence
en-close              preter-natural
es-say                pro-long
ex-terminate          re-gain
extra-ordinary        retro-grade
for-bear              sub-join
fore-see              super-fine
im-perfect            trans-migration
in-glorious           un-worthy
inter-view            under-written
intro-duction         up-right
ob-noxious            with-draw
off-spring            _&c._, _&c._, _&c._


_Of an_ INTERJECTION.

An Interjection _is a Part of Speech_, that serves to express some
sudden Motion or Passion of the Mind, transported with the Sensation of
Pleasure or Pain.

Of Pleasure; as, _O brave!_ _O Heavens! O Joy!_

Of Pain; as _Alas! O my God! O Lord!_

INTERJECTIONS _of a_ lower Order.

Of Caution; as, _hold! take Care!_

Of Admiration; as, _see! look! behold!_

Of Aversion; as, _fie! away you Fool!_

Of Silence; as, _be still! Silence!_


_Of_ SYNTAX.

Syntax is the Manner of constructing one Word with another prescribed
by the _Rules of_ GRAMMAR.

RULE 1st.

The Article _a_ is usually placed before a Word that begins with a
_Consonant_, the Article _an_ before a Word that begins with a _Vowel_,
and either _a_ or _an_ before a Word that begins with an _h_; and the
Article _the_, before a Word that begins either with a _Vowel_ or a
_Consonant_; as, _a Christian_, _an Infidel_, _a Heathen_, or _an
Heathen_; _the Christian_, _the Infidel_, _the Heathen_.

RULE 2d.

A Noun _Substantive_ is usually placed after its _Noun Adjective_; as
the _Second Chapter_, a _great Man_. But sometimes for the Sake of
greater Distinction the _Adjective_ is placed after, with the Article
_the_ before it, as _George the Second_, _Peter the Great_. In _Poetry_
the _Adjective_ is placed either before or after its _Substantive_
indifferently, as the Versification requires it.

RULE 3d.

All _Nouns and Pronouns_ are of the _third Person_ except _I and we_,
which are of the _first Person_, and _Thou, you and ye_, which are of
the _Second Person_; and except the _Relative Pronouns_ which are
always of the _same Person_ with the _Personal Pronoun_ to which they
relate; as _I love, thou lovest, he loveth; I who love, Thou who
lovest, he who loveth_.

RULE 4th.

The _prefix Pronouns_, _I, we, thou, you, ye, he, she, they, who_, are
usually placed before the _Verb_; and the _Subsequent Pronouns_, _me,
us, thee, him, her, them, whom_, are usually placed after; as _I love
the Dog, the Dog loves me_. But when a _Question_ is asked, or when the
_Verb_ is of the _Imperative Mood_, or in short Sentences, the _prefix
Pronouns_ are usually placed after; as _lovest thou me? love thou
thyself, said he, said they_.

RULE 5th.

When a Question is asked, and the _Verb_ has an _Auxiliary Sign_, or an
_Auxiliary Verb_, the _governing Noun_ or _Pronoun_ is placed
immediately after such _Auxiliary_; as _does the Sun shine? has he
washed his Hands?_ And when the _Verb_ has two or more _Auxiliaries_,
the _Noun or Pronoun_ is placed after the first; as _have I been
taught? Cou'd the Truth have been known?_

RULE 6th.

The _Verb_ agrees with its _governing Noun_, _Pronoun Personal_, or
_Pronoun Relative_, in _Number_ and _Person_; as _the Birds sing_,
_thou lovest_, _he who loveth_.

RULE 7th.

A NOUN of _Multitude_ may have a _Verb_ either _Singular_ or _Plural_;
as _the People is mad_, or _the People are mad_.

But if a _Substantive_ of the same Signification follows, that is not a
_Noun of Multitude_, then the _Verb_ is always Plural; as we do not say
_the People is a mad Man_, but _the People are mad Men_.

RULE 8th.

Two or more _Nouns_ or _Pronouns Singular_, will have a _Verb Plural_;
as _the Dog and Cat are very loving_. But when two or more
_Substantives Singular_ signify the same _Thing_ or _Person_, or when
the _Preposition_ OF intervenes, the _Verb_ is always _Singular_; as
_the River Severn is Navigable._ _William the Conqueror was a great
Man._ _This System of Grammar is compendious_.

RULE 9th.

The _subsequent Pronouns_ are usually placed after _Prepositions and
Interjections_; as _of me, to us, for thee, with her, from them,
against whom, O me!_


_Of the_ POINTS _or_ PAUSES.

The _Points_ or _Pauses_ have a Sort of musical Proportion.

The _Period_ is marked thus (.)----Its _Time_ is equal to two _Colons_
and is never placed but at the End of a Sentence, the Sense of which is
perfect and compleat; as _By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice._

The _Colon_ is marked thus (:) ---- Its _Time_ is equal to two
_Semicolons_, and is placed where the Sense seems to be perfect and
compleat; but to which notwithstanding something may still be added; as
_give Instruction to a wise Man, and he will be yet wiser: Teach a just
Man and he will increase in Learning_.

The _Semicolon_ is marked thus (;) ---- its _Time_ is equal to two
_Commas_, and is placed where the Sense is less compleat than the
_Colon_, and more compleat than the _Comma_; as _a wise Man's Heart is
at his right Hand; but a Fool's Heart is at his left_.

The _Comma_ is marked thus (,) ---- It is the last and least _Pause_ or
_Time_ that is made use of, and serves to distinguish the simple
Numbers of a _Period_; as _arise, my Friend, and come away_.


_Of the other NOTES or CHARACTERS._

A Note of _Interrogation_ (?) is used when a Question is asked; as _who
comes there?_

A Note of _Admiration_ (!) is used after _Interjections_ or _short
Sentences_ to express our Wonder and Surprize; as _O!_ _O LORD!_

A Parenthesis (_rarely made use of by a good Writer_) is used to
inclose one Sentence within another.

The _Paragraph_ is marked thus (¶) and denotes the beginning of a new
Discourse.

An (') _Apostrophe_ is used when some Part of a Word is left out; as
_Alexander's Horse_, for _Alexander his Horse_.

A _Hyphen_ (-) is used to join together two Words, as _Foot-stool_,
_&c._ and is used also when part of a Word is written in one Line, and
part in another.

The _Caret_ is marked thus, (^) to shew where the Words in any Sentence
that are left out, shou'd come in; as

           is
_the Lady  ^  beautiful._


The _Subdivision_, or part of a Chapter is marked usually thus, §.


The _Index_ points to some remarkable Passage thus, Index finger,
pointing to the right].

A _Quotation_ is a double _Comma_ reverse and set against some Lines on
the left side of a _Page_, to shew that they are quoted from another
_Author_, thus, ".

The _Notes_ that refer to the _Margin_ are an _Asterisk_ made thus, *,
an _Obelisk_ thus, [Dagger symbol], also thus, ||.

Besides these there are _literal Characters_, _numeral Characters_, and
_Abbreviations_, the Knowledge of which is not so easily to be acquired
by GRAMMAR _Rules_, as by diligent Observation and Experience.


_The_ END.






End of Project Gutenberg's A Short System of English Grammar, by Henry Bate

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SHORT SYSTEM OF ENGLISH GRAMMAR ***

***** This file should be named 26991-8.txt or 26991-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/9/9/26991/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Lindy Walsh and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
