Project Gutenberg's Dialogues in French and English, by William Caxton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Dialogues in French and English

Author: William Caxton

Editor: Henry Bradley

Release Date: June 24, 2009 [EBook #29214]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIALOGUES IN FRENCH AND ENGLISH ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Greg Lindahl and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber’s Note:

This text uses UTF-8 (Unicode) file encoding. If the apostrophes and
quotation marks in this paragraph appear as garbage, make sure your
text reader’s “character set” or “file encoding” is set to Unicode
(UTF-8). You may also need to change the default font. As a last
resort, use the Latin-1 version of the file instead.

In the main text, page divisions have been retained because page and
line numbers are used in the Index. Page numbers are shown in [[double
brackets]]. Page numbers in the Table of Contents are original.

Further details on format are at the end of the e-text, followed by
a list of errors noted by the transcriber. Numbering errors in the
vocabulary lists are shown inline in [[double brackets]].]




  Early English Text Society.

  EXTRA SERIES, LXXIX.


  Dialogues in French and English.

  BY WILLIAM CAXTON.

  (Adapted from a Fourteenth-Century Book of Dialogues
  in French and Flemish.)

  EDITED FROM CAXTON’S PRINTED TEXT (ABOUT 1483), WITH
  INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND WORD-LISTS,

  BY

  HENRY BRADLEY, M.A.,

  _Joint-Editor of the New English Dictionary._

  LONDON:
  PUBLISHED FOR THE EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY,
  BY KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Ltd.

  PATERNOSTER HOUSE, CHARING CROSS ROAD.

  MDCCCC.


  _Price Ten Shillings._




  BERLIN: ASHER & CO., 13, UNTER DEN LINDEN.
  NEW YORK: C. SCRIBNER & CO.; LEYPOLDT & HOLT.
  PHILADELPHIA: J. B. LIPPINCOTT & CO.




  Dialogues in French and English.

  BY WILLIAM CAXTON.

  (Adapted from a Fourteenth-Century Book of Dialogues
  in French and Flemish.)

  EDITED FROM CAXTON’S PRINTED TEXT (ABOUT 1483), WITH
  INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND WORD-LISTS,

  BY

  HENRY BRADLEY, M.A.,
  _Joint-Editor of the New English Dictionary._

  LONDON:
  PUBLISHED FOR THE EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY,
  BY KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Ltd.

  PATERNOSTER HOUSE, CHARING CROSS ROAD.
  M DCCCC.




Extra Series, No. LXXIX.

OXFORD: HORACE HART, M.A., PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY.




INTRODUCTION.


The work now for the first time reprinted from Caxton’s original edition
has been preserved in three copies. One of these is in the Library of
Ripon Cathedral, another in the Spencer Library, now at Manchester, and
the third at Bamborough Castle. A small fragment, consisting of pp.
17-18 and 27-28, is in the Bodleian Library. The text of the present
edition is taken from the Ripon copy. I have not had an opportunity of
seeing this myself; but a type-written transcript was supplied to me by
Mr. John Whitham, Chapter Clerk of Ripon Cathedral, and the proofs were
collated with the Ripon book by the Rev. Dr. Fowler, Vice-Principal of
Bishop Hatfield’s Hall, Durham, who was kind enough to re-examine every
passage in which I suspected a possible inaccuracy. It is therefore
reasonable to hope that the present reprint will be found to be a
strictly faithful representation of the original edition.

The earlier bibliographers gave to the book the entirely inappropriate
title of ‘Instructions for Travellers.’ Mr. Blades is nearer the mark in
calling it ‘A Vocabulary in French and English,’ but, as it consists
chiefly of a collection of colloquial phrases and dialogues, the
designation adopted in the present edition appears to be preferable. As
in other printed works of the same period, there is no title-page in the
original edition, so that a modern editor is at liberty to give to the
book whatever name may most accurately describe its character. The name
of Caxton does not occur in the colophon, which merely states that the
work was printed at Westminster; but the authorship is sufficiently
certain from internal evidence. On the ground of the form of type
employed, Mr. Blades inferred that the book was printed about 1483.
However this may be, there are, as will be shown, decisive reasons for
believing that it was written at a much earlier period.

A fact which has hitherto escaped notice is that Caxton’s book is
essentially an adaptation of a collection of phrases and dialogues in
French and Flemish, of which an edition was published by Michelant in
1875[1], from a MS. in the Bibliothèque Nationale.

    [Footnote 1: _Le Livre des Mestiers: Dialogues français-flamands
    composés au XIV^e siècle par un maître d’école de la ville de
    Bruges_. Paris: Librairie Tross.]

The text of Caxton’s original cannot, indeed, have been precisely
identical with that of the MS. used by Michelant. It contained many
passages which are wanting in the Paris MS., and in some instances had
obviously preferable readings. Caxton’s English sentences are very often
servile translations from the Flemish, and he sometimes falls into the
use of Flemish words and idioms in such a way as to show that his long
residence abroad had impaired his familiarity with his native language.
The French _respaulme cet hanap_, for instance, is rendered by ‘spoylle
the cup.’ Of course the English verb _spoylle_ never meant ‘to rinse’;
Caxton was misled by the sound of the Flemish _spoel_. Caxton’s ‘after
the house,’ as a translation of _aual la maison_ (throughout the house),
is explicable only by a reference to the Flemish version, which has
_achter huse_. The verb _formaketh_, which has not elsewhere been found
in English, is an adoption of the Flemish _vermaect_ (repairs). Another
Flemicism is Caxton’s _whiler_ (= while ere) for ‘some time ago,’ in
Flemish _wilen eer_. It is still more curious to find Caxton writing ‘it
_en_ is not,’ instead of ‘it is not’; this _en_ is the particle prefixed
in Flemish to the verb of a negative sentence. As is well known,
Caxton’s translation of ‘Reynard the Fox’ exhibits many phenomena of a
similar kind. From all the circumstances, we may perhaps conclude that
Caxton, while still resident in Bruges, added an English column to his
copy of the French-Flemish phrase-book, rather as a sort of exercise
than with any view to publication, and that he handed it over to his
compositors at Westminster without taking the trouble to subject it to
any material revision.

The original work contains so many references to the city of Bruges that
it is impossible to doubt that it was compiled there. According to
Michelant, the Paris MS. was written in the first half of the fourteenth
century. The MS. used by Caxton must itself have been written not later
than the second decade of the fifteenth century; unless, indeed, it was
an unaltered transcript from an older MS. The evidence on which this
conclusion is based is somewhat curious. Caxton’s text contains two
passages in which the pope is spoken of as still resident at Avignon.
Now the ‘Babylonish captivity’ of the popes ended in 1378; and, even if
we suppose that at Bruges the Avignon anti-popes were recognized by some
persons to the very last, the latest date at which these passages could
have been written is the year 1417. It is not easy to understand how it
was possible for Caxton to leave uncorrected these references to a state
of things which he must have known had long ceased to exist. The only
explanation of the fact seems to be that, as has been suggested above,
he sent his many years old MS. to the press without going over it again.
It may be remarked that one of the Avignon passages does not occur in
the text as printed by Michelant. As it would be absurd to suppose that
it was introduced by Caxton himself, the inference is clear that his
copy of the original work was fuller than that contained in the Paris
MS. Probably Caxton may have added a few lines here and there--the
mention of certain English towns and fairs on pp. 18-19, and that of
English bishoprics on p. 23, for instance, were most likely inserted by
him. But by far the greatest portion of the matter which is peculiar to
Caxton’s form of the dialogues may be confidently ascribed to his
original, on account of the frequent occurrence of passages in which,
while the French is quite correct, the English translation shows
imperfect understanding of the sense.

One of the most remarkable differences between Caxton’s form of the
dialogues and that which is preserved in the Paris MS. consists in the
transposition of several of the sections in that portion of the work to
which the title ‘Le Livre des Mestiers’ is most properly applicable (pp.
24-44 of Caxton’s edition). In both versions the sections in this
portion are arranged in the alphabetical order of the Christian names of
the persons referred to; but the names connected with particular
employments are not always the same in the two versions. Thus in
Michelant the bowyer is called Filbert, in Caxton he is Guillebert; in
Michelant the carpenter is Henri, in Caxton Lambert; in Michelant the
tiler is Martin, in Caxton Lamfroy; and so on. The resulting
transpositions render it somewhat difficult at first sight to perceive
the substantial identity of the matter in the two books. If an editor
wished to print Caxton’s text and that of the Paris MS. in parallel
columns, he would need to have recourse to the ingenious device adopted
by Professor Skeat in the Clarendon Press edition of the three
recensions of _Piers Plowman_; that is to say, all the sections in which
the names have been altered would have to be given twice over in each
column--with large print where they occur in their alphabetical place,
and with small print opposite to the corresponding sections in the other
text. It is hard to see why the person who made the later version
followed by Caxton should have taken the trouble to alter the names and
re-arrange the material in the new alphabetical order. One might almost
suspect that the names were those of actual tradesmen in Bruges, and
that the alterations represent changes that had taken place between the
earlier and the later edition of the book.

The French of the Paris MS. is the Picard dialect of the former half of
the fourteenth century. The French of Caxton’s book retains many of the
original north-eastern forms, but is to a considerable extent modernized
and assimilated to the literary language of a later period. Such
‘etymological’ spellings as _recepueur_, _debuoit_, are common in
Caxton’s text, but rarely occur in Michelant. The following comparative
specimen of the two versions will afford some notion of the
orthographical and grammatical differences between them, and also of the
degree in which Caxton’s English was influenced by his Flemish original.


  MICHELANT.
      CAXTON.

  Pierres le bateur a l’arket
  Pietre de coutenslaerre
      Pyere le bateure de laine
      Peter the betar of wulle

  Va tout useus,
  Gaet al ledich,
      Va tout oyseux,
      Gooth alle ydle,

  Car ses doiiens
  Want siin deken
      Car son doyen
      For his dene

  Li ha desfendu son mestier
  Heeft hem verboden sin ambocht
      Lui a deffendu son mestier
      Hath forboden hym hys craft

  Sur l’amende de xx. sauls,
  Up de boete van xx. scelle,
      Sour l’amende de vingt solz,
      Vpon thamendes of xx. shelyngs,

  Dusqu’ a dont qu’il aura
  Tote dien dat hi sal hebben
      Jusques a dont quil aura
      Till that he shall haue

  Achaté le franchise.
  Ghecocht sine vrihede.
      Achatte sa franchise.
      Bought his franchyse.

  Il s’en plaindra
  Hi sals hem beclaghen
      Il sen plaindra
      He shall complaine hym

  Au bourghmaistre,
  Den buerghmeestre,
      Au burchmaistre,
      Unto bourghmaistre,

  Et li doiiens, ne si jurei
  Ende de dekene no sine gheswoerne
      Et les gardiens des mestiers
      And the wardeyns of the crafte

  N’en font conte.
  Ne micken niet.
      Nen font compte.
      sette not therby.

  Pol li cuveliers
  Pauwels de cupre
      Poul le cuuelier
      Poule the couper

  Fait et refait cuves,
  Maect ende vermaect cupen,
      Faict et refaict les cuues,
      Maketh and formaketh the keupis,

  Cuviers et tonniaux,
  Cupekine ende vaten,
      tonniaulx, vaissiaux
      Barellis, vassellis

  Chercles et tonnelets
  Houpen ende tonnekine.
      Courans et gouttans.
      Lekyng and droppyng.

  Il ont doilloires, wembelkins,
  Si hebben paerden, spikelboren,

  Forets, tareales, et planes.
  Foretten, navegheeren ende scaven.

  Paulins le mesureur de blé
  Pauwelin de corenmetere
      Paulin le mesureur de bled
      Paulyn the metar of corne

  A si longement mesuret,
  Heeft so langhe ghemeten.
      A tant mesure
      Hath so moche moten

      De bled et de mestelon
      Of corne and of mestelyn,

  Qu’il ne puet plus
  Dat hi mach nemmeer
      Quil ne peult plus
      That he may no more

  Par che grande villeche;
  Mit sire groter outheide;
      de viellesse;
      for age;

  Car il est tout kenus.
  Want hi es al calv.
      Il est tout gryse.
      He is alle graye.

      Il donna [_sic_] a chescun sa mesure.
      He gyueth to euerich his mesure.

  Pirote, si filleulle,
  Pierote, siin dochterkine,
      Pieronne sa filleule
      Pieryne his doughter

  Est la pire garche
  Es die quaetste dierne
      Est la pieure grace
      Is the shrewest ghyrle

  Que je sache
  Die ic weet
      Que ie sache
      That I knowe

  Dechà mer, ne delà.
  An disside der zee, no an ghene zide.
      de cha la mere.
      on this side the see.

  Quintins li tonliers
  Quintin de tolnare
      Quintin le tollenier
      Quyntyne the tollar

  A pris de mi
  Heeft ghenomen van mi
      A pris de moy
      Hath taken of me

  Une lb. de gros
  1 lb. grot
      Vng liure de gros
      A pound of grotes

  Plus qu’il ne devoit;
  Meer dan hi sculdich was;
      Plus quil ne debuoit prendre
      More than he ought to take

      Du droit tonlieu;
      Of right tolle.

  Si m’en trairai
  Zo dat ic sal trucken
      Sy me trayeray
      So shall I drawe me

  Au recheveur
  Vor den ontfanghere
      Au recepueur
      Vnto the receyuour

  Pour faire me plainte,
  Omme te doene mine claghe

  Et pour men droit requerre.
  Ende omne min recht te versoukene.
      Pour men droit requerre.
      For my right to requyre.

In the present edition Caxton’s text has been literally reproduced,
except that obvious misprints are corrected (the original readings being
given in the marginal notes[1]), and that modern punctuation has been
added for the sake of intelligibility. Where Caxton leaves a space for
an illuminated initial (a small letter being printed in the middle to
serve as a guide) I have used a large capital. The List of English Words
at the end is intended to contain all the words that require any
explanation, or are on any account noteworthy. The List of French Words,
which I was unable to prepare on account of ill-health, has been
compiled by Mr. Henry Littlehales.

  HENRY BRADLEY.

    [Footnote 1: Misprints affecting only the word-division, however,
    have been corrected without remark.]




NOTES.


3^17. This corresponds with the beginning of the French-Flemish
dialogues printed by Michelant. The preceding table of contents may have
been added by Caxton himself.

3^32-4^7. Not in Michelant.

4^8. The French should no doubt read _quil y ait_, as in Michelant, but
Caxton translates the erroneous reading.

8^36. There is some mistake here. Michelant’s text has _cavecheul_,
bed’s head.

8^39-10^6. Michelant’s text is here quite different, enumerating the
parts of the body and the articles necessary for the toilet.

13^19. _Confite_ is a misreading on Caxton’s part for _confire_,
comfrey; Michelant has the right word.

15^31. _Sera_ should be _fera_, as in Michelant; the sense is ‘the
abatement which you will make will cause it to be sold.’ Caxton attempts
to translate the erroneous reading _sera_, but his translation makes no
sense.

16^1-17^19. This interesting portion of the dialogue is not in
Michelant.

18^18. _It en is not_ = Flemish _het en es niet_. Evidently when this
was written Caxton had become more familiar with Flemish than with his
native language.

18^26-19^10. The names of English towns in this list are added by
Caxton.

22^14-25^9. The enumeration of ecclesiastical and civil dignitaries is
much more full here than in Michelant’s text, but it is probable that
Caxton had before him an amplified copy of the original work, as the
mention of the pope’s residence at Avignon obviously cannot have been
inserted by him. The names of English bishoprics, however, are most
likely added by Caxton.

24^6. _Bogars_ in the French column (rendered by _lewd freris_, i.e. lay
brothers) appears to be a mistake for _Begars_, Beghards.

26^37. _Spoylle the cuppe._ Another proof that Caxton had forgotten his
English. The Flemish is _spoel den nap_, ‘rinse the cup’; the English
_spoil_ of course never had the sense ‘to rinse.’

29^12. _Byledyng_ is an attempt at literal interpretation of the French
_deduit_, delight.

29^13. _Serouge (serourge)_ is properly ‘brother-in-law’; it is not
clear whether Caxton’s rendering _cosen alyed_ is a mistranslation, or
whether the French word was used at Bruges in the extended sense.

30^4-6. This reference to the truce between the English and the Scots is
not, as might perhaps be thought, an insertion by Caxton. Michelant
considers the truce in question to be that of the year 1340.

30^30-33. Michelant’s text omits these lines, to the manifest injury of
the sense.

35^23-25. Caxton seems here to have found his MS. illegible: Michelant’s
text has ‘Fremius [? read _Fremins_] ses voisins Dist qu’el vault bien
son argent.’

37^8-30. This emphatic praise of the writer’s craft is not in Michelant;
probably it expresses Caxton’s own sentiments.

38^36. _Enprintees_, which Caxton amazingly renders ‘enprinted,’ is
doubtless a mistake for _enpruntes_, borrowed. The occurrence of this
mistake shows that the passage must have been in Caxton’s original,
though it is not in Michelant’s text. Caxton’s account of the
bookseller’s stock is much fuller than that in Michelant, but apparently
this is not due, as might naturally be supposed, to his own interest in
the subject.

44^17. _Formaketh_, literally adopted from the Flemish _vermaect_,
repairs.

44^26. _Filleule_ is god-daughter, not ‘daughter.’ The Flemish has
_dochterkine_, which, though literally = ‘little daughter,’ was used for
‘god-daughter.’

46^1. It is curious that the names beginning with S and T, which appear
in Michelant, are omitted by Caxton. Possibly a leaf was missing in his
original.

50^22. From this line to the end seems to be an addition by Caxton.




  [CAXTON’S DIALOGUES]

  [Or ‘A Book for Travellers,’ _Typ. Ant._ i. 315: or
  ‘A Vocabulary,’ Blades, ii. 133.]

  [TABLE OF CONTENTS.]

  FRENSSHE.
    ENGLISSH.

[Sidenote: P. 1.]

  CY commence la table
    HIER begynneth the table
  De cest prouffytable doctrine,
    Of this prouffytable lernynge,
  Pour trouuer tout par ordene
    For to fynde all by ordre
  Ce que on vouldra aprendre.
    That whiche men wylle lerne.                       4

                                          [PAGE]

  Premierment, linuocacion de la
  trinite;                                     3
    Fyrst, the callyng of the trinite;
  Comment on doibt chescun saluer;             4
    How every man ought grete othir;
  Les meubles aual la mayson;                  6
    The catayllys langyng to the house;                8
  Les noms des chars & de beestes[1];         10
    The names of flessh and of bestis;

    [Footnote 1: beestis]

  Et doysiaulz priues & sauuages;             10
    And of byrdes tame and wylde;
  Les noms des poyssons de mer;               11
    The names of fysshes of the see;
  Et des poyssons des Ryuiers;                12
    And of fysshes of the Riuers;                     12
  Les noms de compenaiges;                    12
    The names of whyte mete;
  Les noms des fruis darbres;                 13
    The names of the fruytes of trees;
  Les noms des pluiseurs arbres;              13
    The names of diuerse trees;
  Les noms des potages;                       13
    The names of potages;                             16
  Les noms des co{m}muns beuurages;           14
    The names of comyn drynkes;
  La marchandyse des draps                    14
    The marchandise of clothe
  Des diuerses villes et festes;              18
    Of diuerse tounes and fayres;
  Les marchandises des laines;                19
    The marchandyse of wulle;                         20
  Les noms des cuyrs & des peaulx;            19
    The names of hydes and of skynnes;
  Les noms des apotecaires;                   19
    The names of the apotecaries;
  Les noms des Oyles,                         20
    The names of Oyles,
  Des coleurs des paintres;                   20
    Of the colours of paynters;                       24
  Les noms des crasseries,                    20
    The names of coriars,
  Des aluns et daultres tainctures;           20
    Of alume and of othir colours;
  Les noms des tous metauls;                  21
    The names of all metals;
  Les noms des merceries;                     21
    The names of merceryes;                           28
[[2]]
  Les noms des pluiseurs graines;             22
    The names of diuerse graynes;
  Des prelats de saincte eglyse,              22
    Of the prelates of holy chirche,
  Du pape, cardinaulz, euesques,              22
    Of the pope, cardinals, bisshops,
  Archeuesques, abbes, et officiaulx,         23
    Archebisshops, abbotes, and officials,             4
  Des moynes et gens de lordene;              23
    Of monkes and folke of ordre;
  De lempereur, roys, et roynes,              22
    Of themperour, kynges, and quenes,
  Des ducs, countes, et princes,              24
    Of dukes, erles, and princes,
  Barons, cheualiers, escuyers;               24
    Barons, knyghtes, and squyers;                     8
  Les noms dhommes et des femmes,             25
    The names of men and of wymmen,
  Et des mestiers, selon lordre de
  a b c;                                      26
    And of craftes, after thordre of
    a b c;
  Les grandes festes et termes de
  lan;                                        28
    The grete festes and termes of the
    yere;                                             12
  Des orfeures, tisserans, & foulons[1],      31
    Of goldsmythes, weuers, and fullers,

    [Footnote 1: foulous]

  Tondeurs, pigneresses, fileresses;          32
    Sheremen, kempsters, spynsters;
  Des lormiers et armurers,                   33
    Of bridelmakers and armorers,                     16

[Sidenote: P. 2.]

  Des tailliers & Vieswariers,                34
    Of tayllours and vpholdsters,
  Des taincturiers[2] & drappiers,            35
    Of dyers and drapers,

    [Footnote 2: taiuc-]

  Des boulengiers & cordewaniers,             35
    Of bakers and shoomakers,
  Des escripuains & arceniers,                36
    Of skriueners and boumakers,                      20
  Des moulniers & bouchiers,                  37
    Of mylnars and bochiers,
  Des poissonners & teliers,                  38
    Of fysshmongers and of lynweuers,
  Des chaudeliers[3] & libraries,             38
    Of ketelmakers and librariers,

    [Footnote 3: chan-]

  Des gauntiers & corbelliers,            40, 38
    Of glouers and of maundemakers,                   24
  Des painturers & vsuriers,                  39
    Of paintours and vsuriers,
  Des couureurs de tieulles & destrain,       40
    Of tylers and thatchers,
  Des charpentiers & feultriers,              39
    Of carpenters and hatmakers,
  Des chauetiers et boursiers,                41
    Of cobelers and pursers,                          28
  Des cousturiers et especiers,               42
    Of shepsters and spycers,
  Des coultiers et hosteliers,                42
    Of brokers and hosteliers,
  Des touriers et cuueliers,                  43
    Of kepars of prisons and coupers,
  Des mesuriers et messagiers,                44
    Of metars and messagiers,                         32
  Des chartons et changiers,                  45
    Of carters and chaungers,
  Des mo{n}noyers et pastesiers,              45
    Of myntemakers and pybakers,
  Des jougleurs & teneurs,                    46
    Of pleyers and tawyers,
  Des vairriers et serruriers,                46
    Of makers of greywerke and lokyers,               36
  Des gorliers et huchiers,                   46
    Of gorelmakers and joyners,
  Des parcenniers;                            47
    Of parchemyn makers;
  Et les parolles que chescun                 49
    And the wordes that eueryche
  Pourra apprendre pour aler
    May lerne for to goo                              40

[[3]]
[Headnote: CONTENTS. OBJECT OF THE BOOK. PROLOGUE.]

  Dun pays au ville a aultre;                 49
    Fro one lande or toune to anothir;
  Et plus aultres raysons
    And moo othir resons
  Que seroyent trop longues
    That shold be over longe
  De mettre en cest table.
    To sette in this table.                            4
  En la fin de cest doctrine                  50
    In the ende of this doctrine
  Trouueres[1] la maniere
    Shall ye fynde the manere

    [Footnote 1: Trouuerers]

  Pour aprendre acompter                      51
    For to lerne rekene
  Par liures, par soulz, par deniers.
    By poundes, by shelynges, by pens.             8
  Vostre recepte et vostre myse
    Your recyte and your gyuing oute
  Raportes tout en somme.
    Brynge it all in somme.
  Faittes diligence daprendre.
    Doo diligence for to lerne.
  Fuyes oyseusete, petyz et grandes,
    Flee ydlenes, smal and grete,                 12
  Car tous vices en so{u}nt sourdans.
    For all vices springen therof.
  Tres bonne doctrine
    Ryght good lernyng
  Pour aprendre
    For to lerne
  Briefment fransoys et engloys.
    Shortly frenssh and englyssh.                 16




[Sidenote: P. 3.]

  ++OV nom du pere,
    In the name of the fadre,
  Et du filz,
    And of the soone,
  Et du sainte esperite,
    And of the holy ghoost,
  Veul commencier
    I wyll begynne                                20
  Et ordonner ung livre,
    And ordeyne this book,
  Par le quel on pourra
    By the whiche men shall mowe
  Roysonnablement entendre
    Resonably vnderstande
  Fransoys et engloys,
    Frenssh and englissh,                         24
  Du tant co{m}me cest escript
    Of as moche as this writing
  Pourra contenir et estendre;
    Shall conteyne and stratche;
  Car il ne peult tout comprendre;
    For he may not alle comprise;
  Mais ce quon ny trouuera
    But that which can not be founden             28
  Declaire en cestui
    Declared in this
  Pourra on trouuer ailleurs,
    Shall be founde somwhere els,
  En aultres liures.
    In othir bookes.
  Mais sachies pour voir
    But knowe for trouthe                         32
  Que es lignes de cest aucteur
    That in the lynes of this auctour
  Sount plus de parolles et de raysons
    Ben moo wordes and reasons
  Comprinses, et de responses,
    Comprised, and of ansuers,
  Que[2] en moult daultres liures.
    Than in many othir bookes.                    36

    [Footnote 2: Qne]

  Qui ceste liure vouldra aprendre
    Who this booke shall wylle lerne
  Bien pourra entreprendre
    May well entreprise or take on honde

[[4]]
[Headnote: THIS IS A TRADER’S HANDBOOK. HOW TO SALUTE FOLK.]

  Marchandises dun pays a lautre,
    Marchandises fro one land to anothir,
  Et cognoistre maintes denrees
    And to knowe many wares
  Que[1] lui seroient bon achetes
    Which to hym shalbe good to be bouȝt           4
  Ou vendues pour riche deuenir.
    Or solde for riche to become.

    [Footnote 1: Qne]

  Aprendes ce liure diligement;
    Lerne this book diligently;
  Grande prouffyt y gyst vrayement.
    Grete prouffyt lieth therin truly.




[Sidenote: [CH. I.]]

  ++OR scaues quil affiert
    ++NOw knowe what behoueth                      8
  Quil ait du tout vne partie.
    That he haue of alle a partie.
  Quand vous alles par les rues,
    Whan ye goo by the streetes,
  Et vous encountres aulcuns
    And ye mete ony
  Que vous cognossies,
    That ye knowe,                                12
  Ou[2] quilz soyent de vostre
    Or that they be of your
  cognoissa{u}nce,
    knowelech,

    [Footnote 2: On]

  Soyes ysnel et apparaillies
    Be swyft and redy
  De luy ou deulx premier saluer,
    Hym or hem first to grete,                    16
  Sil est ou sils so{u}nt hommes de valeur.
    Yf he be or they be men of valure.
  Ostes vostre chappron
    Doo of your hood
  Pour dames & damoysellys;
    For ladies and damoyselles;
  Se ilz ostent leur chaperon,
    Yf they doo of their hood,                    20
  Sy le remettes de vous mayns.
    So sette it on agayn with your ha{n}dis.
  En telle maniere
    In such manere

[Sidenote: P. 4.]

  Les poes saluer:
    May ye salewe them:
  “Sire, dieu vous garde!”
    “Syre, god you kepe!”                         24
  Cest le plus bryef
    That is the shortest
  Que on puise dyre
    That one may saye
  Aux gens en saluant.
    To the peple in salewyng.
  Ou, en aultres vsages:--
    Or, in othir vsages:--                        28
  “Syre, vous soyes bien venus.”
    “Sire, ye be welcome.”
  “Vous, dame ou damoyselle,
    “Ye, lady or damoyselle,
  Vous soyes la bien venu.”
    Ye ben welcome.”
  “Sire, dieu vous doinst bon jour.”
    “Syre, god gyue you good daye.”               32
  “Dame, bon jour vous doinst no{st}re
    “Dame, good daye giue you our
  sire.”
    lord.”
  “Compaignon ou amye,
    “Felawe or frende,
  Vous soies le bien venus.”
    Ye be welcome.”                               36
  “Que faictes vous? comment vous
    “What do ye? how is it with
  est?”
    you?”
  “Bien; que bien vous aies.”
    “Well; that well mote ye haue.”
  “Ou aues este si longement?
    “Where haue ye ben so longe?                  40

[[5]]
[Headnote: SALUTATIONS. HOW TO TAKE LEAVE OF FOLK.]

  Je ne vous vey piecha.”
    I haue not seen you in longe tyme.”
  “Jay este longement hors du pays.”
    “I haue ben longe out of the contre.”
  “En quel pays?”
    “In what contre?”
  “Sire, ce seroit
    “Syre, that shold be                           4
  Trop a racompter;
    Ouermoche for to telle;
  Mais sil vous plaist aulcune chose
    But if you plaise ony thyng
  Que ie puisse fayre,
    That I may doo,
  Commandes le moy
    Commaunde it me                                8
  Comme a celuy
    As to hym
  Qui volentiers le feroit.”
    That gladly shall doo it.”
  “Sire, grand mercy
    “Syre, gramercy
  De vous courtoyses parolles
    Of your courtoys wordes                       12
  Et de vostre bonne volente;
    And of your good wyll;
  Dieu le vous mire!”
    God reward you!”
  “Dieu le me laisse deseruyr!
    “God late me deserue it!
  Sachies certainement[1]
    Knowe ye certaynely                           16
  Que vous ne y estes
    That ye be not
  Point engaignies[2],
    Nothyng deceyued[5],

    [Footnote 1: certaineint]

    [Footnote 2: eugaignies]

    [Footnote 5: deceyned]

  Car ce vous feroye ie,
    For that wold I doo
  Pour vous et pour les vostres.
    For you and for youris.                       20
  +A dieu vous comande.
    +To god I you commaunde.
  Je prenge congie[3] a vous.”
    I take leue of you.”

    [Footnote 3: cougie]

  Respondes ainsi:
    Ansuere thus:
  “Nostre sire vous conduyse!”
    “Our lorde conduyte you!”                     24
  “A dieu soyes vous comandes!”
    “To god mote ye be commaunded!”
  “Dieu vous ait en sa sainte garde!”
    “God you haue in his holy kepyng!”

[Sidenote: P. 5.]

  “Allez a dieu[4].
    “Goo ye to god.

    [Footnote 4: dien]

  Salues moy la dame
    Grete me the lady                             28
  (Ou la damoyselle)
    (Or the damyselle)
  De vostre mayson
    Of your house
  (Ou de vostre hostel),
    (Or of your heberow),
  Vostre femme, vous enfans,
    Your wyf, your children,                      32
  Vostre mary,
    Your husbonde,
  Vostre fyltz et vous filles,
    Your sones and your doughtres,
  Toute vostre maisnye.
    Alle your meyne.
  Si me recomandes
    Also recommaunde me                           36
  A mon seigneur,
    To my lorde,
  A mes damoyseauls,
    To my yong lordes,
  A ma dame,
    To my lady,
  A ma damoyselle,
    To my yong lady,                              40

[[6]]
[Headnote: TAKING LEAVE. WINDOWS, BEDS AND BEDDING.]

  A vostre pere et a vostre mere,
    To your fadre and to your modre,
  A vostre tayon et a vostre taye,
    To your belfadre & to your beldame,
  A vostre oncle et a vostre aunte,
    To your eme & to your aunte,
  A vostre cosyns et a vostre cosynes,
    To your cosyns and to your nieces,             4
  A vous cousyns germains,
    To your cosyns germayns,
  A vostre nepheux & a vostre nieces,
    To your neueus & to your nieces,
  Qui sont enfans de vostre frere
    Whiche ben children of your brother
  Ou de vostre soeur.
    Or of your suster.                             8
  Vous freres, vous soeurs,
    Your brethern, your sustres,
  Ne loublies mye.”
    Forgete them not.”
  “Je le vous feray voulentiers.
    “I shal do it for you gladly.
  A dieu vous command.”
    To god I commaunde you.”                      12
  “Or alles a dieu.”
    “Now goo to god.”
  Cy finent les salutations
    Thus enden the salutations
  Et les responses.
    And the ansueris.




[Sidenote: [CH. II.]]

  ++OR mestoet auant parler
    ++NOw standeth me for to speke                16
  Daultres choses necessaires:
    Of othir thynges necessarie:
  Cest a sauoyr des besongnes
    That is to saye of thinges
  Que on vse aual le maison,
    That ben vsed after the hous,
  De quoy on ne peult synon.
    Of whiche me may not be withoute.             20
  De la maison premiers diray,
    Of the hous first I shall saye,
  En auenture, se besoing est.
    On auenture, if it be to doo.
  +La maison bien ordonne
    +The hous well ordeyned
  Doybt estre bien fenestree
    Ought to be well wyndowed                     24
  De pluiseurs fenestres
    Of diverse wyndowes
  Par quoy il ait grand clarte.
    By which it haue grete light.
  Il y affiert aux chambres
    Hit behoueth to the chambres
  Solliers, greniers.
    Loftes and garettis.                          28




[Sidenote: [CH. III.]]

[Sidenote: P. 6.]

  ++QVi vin veult maintenier
    ++WHo wyne wyll mayntene
  Conuient auoir chielliers
    Behoueth to haue selers
  Et vne basse chambre
    And a lowe chambre
  Pour prendre aisement.
    For to take his easement.                     32
  +Ores vous conuient avoir lits;
    +Now must ye haue beddes;
  Lyts des plummes;
    Beddes of fetheris;
  Pour les poures suz gesir,
    For the poure to lye on,
  Lyts de bourre;
    Beddes of flockes;                            36
  Sarges, tapites,
    Sarges, tapytes,
  Kieultes poyntes
    Quiltes paynted
  Pour les lits couurir;
    For the beddes to couere;
  Couuertoyrs ainsi;
    Couerlettes also;                             40

[[7]]
[Headnote: BED-FURNITURE, POTS AND PANS, CANS AND BOTTLES.]

  Bankers qui sont beaulx;
    Bankers that ben fayr;
  Dessoubs le lite vng calys;
    Under the bedde a chalon;
  Estrain dedens;
    Strawe therin;
  Bancs, chaiers,
    Benches, chayers,                              4
  Lesons, selles;
    Lystes, stoles;
  Pots de keuure, chaudrens,
    Pottes of coppre, kawdrons,
  Chaudiers, paiels,
    Ketellis, pannes,
  Bachins, lauoirs,
    Basyns, lauours,                               8
  Pots de terre,
    Pottes of erthe,
  Cannes de terre
    Cannes of erthe
  Pour aller al eawe;
    For to go to the watre;
  Ces choses trouueres vous
    Thise thinges shall ye fynde                  12
  En le potterye.
    In the potterye.
  +Se vous aues de quoy,
    +Yf ye haue wherof,
  Faittes que vous ayes
    Doo that ye haue
  Ouurages destain,
    Werkes of tynne,                              16
  Pots destain[1] et cannes,
    Pottes of tynne and cannes,
  Cannes de deux lots,
    Cannes of two stope,
  Cannes dun sestier,
    Cannes of a sextier,

    [Footnote 1: de stain]

  Lotz et demy lotz,
    Stopes and half stopes,                       20
  Pintes et demy pintes.
    Pintes and half pintes.
  Ung lot est appelle
    A stope is called
  Eu aucun lieu[2] vng quart.
    In somme place a quarte.

    [Footnote 2: ancun lien]

  Ce sont les mesures
    Thise ben the mesures                         24
  Que je[3] scay nommer:
    That I can name:

    [Footnote 3: ye]

  Mais les bouteilles
    But the botellis
  Destain, de boz, de cuir,
    Of tyn, of wode, of lether,
  Treuue on de toutes manieres.
    Men fynd of all maneris.                      28
  +Or vous conuient auoir
    +Now must ye haue
  Platteaux destain,
    Platers of tyn,

[Sidenote: P. 7.]

  Escuyelles, sausserons,
    Disshes, saussers,
  Sallieres, trenchores;
    Sallyers, trenchours;                         32
  Ces choses trouueres
    Thise thinges shall ye fynde
  De boz et de terre.
    Of tree and of erthe.
  Couuercles de keuuer,
    Couercles of coppre,
  De terre, et de fer,
    Of erthe, and of yron,                        36
  Or apres vng esculier,
    Now after a disshe fat,
  La on met dedens
    Where me leyeth therin
  Les deuantdittes choses.
    The forsaid thinges.
  +Les louches de boz,
    +And the spones of tree,                      40

[[8]]
[Headnote: FURNITURE, UTENSILS, PLATE AND CLOTHING.]

  Les louches dargent,
    The spones of siluer,
  Metton la on veult,
    That dooe[2] men where they wylle,
  En plus seure garde.
    In most sure kepyng.

    [Footnote 2: dooo]

  +Le louche de pot entour le feu;
    +The ladle of the pot about the fyre;          4
  Trepiet pour asseoir sus;
    Treuet for to sette it on;
  Sur laistre appertient
    Vpon the herthe belongeth
  Laigne ou tourbes,
    Woode or turues,
  Deux brandeurs de fer,
    Two andyrons[3] of yron,                       8
  Ung estenelle, ung greyl.
    A tonge, a gredyron.

    [Footnote 3: andyrous]

  +Ung grauwet,
    +A flessh hoke,
  Coutieaulx pour taillier
    Knyues for to cutte
  Ce quon vouldra,
    That what me shall wylle,                     12
  Ung couttel de poree
    A choppyng knyf
  Pour taillier la poree.
    for to choppe wortes.
  +Hanaps dargent,
    +Cuppes of silver,
  Hanaps dorees,
    Cuppes gylte,                                 16
  Coupes door,
    Couppes of goold,
  Hanaps a pies;
    Cuppes with feet;
  Ces choses mettes
    Thise things set ye
  En vostre huche ou escrijn;
    In your whutche or cheste;                    20
  Vos joyaulx en vostre forchier
    Your jewellis in your forcier
  Que on ne les emble.
    That they be not stolen.
  +Plente des linchieux,
    +Plente of shetes,
  Nappes, touwailles.
    Bordclothes, towellis.                        24
  Pour faire a nous aulx
    For to make to us garlyk
  Et saulses parmi le stamine,
    And sauses thorugh the strayner,
  Vous conuient[1] auoir
    Ye muste haue
  Ung mortier, ung pestiel.
    A morter, a pestyll.                          28

    [Footnote 1: connient]

  +A la perche pendent vos vestures,
    +On the perche hongen your clothes,
  Manteaulx, scurcorps,
    Mantellis, frockes,
  Heuques, clocques,
    Heukes, clokes,
  Cottes, pourpoints,
    Cotes, doblettes,                             32

[Sidenote: P. 8.]

  Vestures, fourrures,
    Clothes, furres,
  Vestures diuer et deste;
    Wynter clothes and of somer;
  Les oreilliers sur le lite;
    The pelowes on the bedde;
  Sur le queuerchief
    Upon the keuerchief                           36
  Chemises, brayes,
    Chertes, briches,
  A tout le braieul.
    With the pauntcher[4].

    [Footnote 4: panutcher]

  +Quand vous estes desvestues
    +Whan ye be vnclothed
  On treuue fourrures
    Me fyndeth furres                             40

[[9]]
[Headnote: FURS, WHITE MEATS, WIFE, PARENTS AND CHILDREN.]

  Descurieus[1], daigneaulx,
    Of beuers and of lombes,
  Plichons de lieures et de conins.
    Pylches of hares and of conyes.

    [Footnote 1: Descuriens]

  +Mettes en le tresoier
    +Sette into the cupbort
  Vostre pain, vostre fourmage,
    Your brede, your chese,                        4
  Vostre bure, vostre viande,
    Your butter, your mete,
  Et aultres companages,
    And othir white mete,
  Le relief de la table.
    The leuynge of the table.
  Faictes quil y aist du seel
    Doo that ther be salte                         8
  Et des voires.
    And glases.
  Cy fine le tierce chapitle.
    Here endeth the thirde chapitre.




[Sidenote: [CH. IV.]]

  ++OR entendes, petys & grands,
    ++Now understande, litell and grete,
  Je vous dirai maintenant
    I shall saye you right forth                  12
  Dune aultre matere
    Of an othir matere
  La quele ie comence.
    The whiche I wyll begynne.
  +Se vous estes maries,
    +Yf ye be maried,
  Et vous aues femme,
    And ye haue a wyfe,                           16
  Et vous ayes marye,
    And ye haue a husbonde,
  +Se vous maintenes paisiblement,
    +So mayntene you pesibly,
  Que vous voisins ne disent
    That your neyghbours saye not
  De vous fors que bien:
    Of you othirwyse than well:                   20
  Ce seroit virgoingne.
    Hit shold be shame.
  +Se vous aues pere & mere,
    +If ye haue fader and moder
  Si les honnoures tousiours;
    So worshippe them alleway;
  Faictes leur honneur;
    Doo to hem worshipp;                          24
  Deportes les;
    Forbere them;
  Car selon le commandement
    For after the commaundement
  Et conseil de cathon,
    And the counseill of cathon,
  Les doibt en honnourer;
    Men ought to worshippe them;                  28
  Car il dist en son liure:
    For he saith in his booke:
  “Honnoure pere & mere.”
    “Worshippe fader and moder.”
  +Se vous aues enfans,
    +Yf ye haue children,
  Si les chastoyes de la verge,
    So chastyse them with the rodde,              32
  Et les instrues
    And enforme them
  De bonnes meurs
    With good maners
  Le temps quilz soient jofnes;
    the tyme that they be yong;

[Sidenote: P. 9.]

  Les envoyes a lescole
    Sende them to the scole                       36
  Aprendre lire et escripre,
    To lerne rede and to write,
  quilz ne resambloient bestes.
    That they resemble not bestis.
  +Soyes debonnair
    +Be ye buxom
  Enuers touttes gens--
    Vnto alle folke--                             40

[[10]]
[Headnote: MARGARET IS SENT TO THE BUTCHER’S AND POULTERER’S.]

  Enuers vous seruans:
    Vnto your seruaunts:
  Penses quilz soyent
    Thynke that they be
  Aussi bons co{m}me vous;
    As good as ye;
  Ne le despites point.
    Despyse them not.                              4
  +Comandes eux v{ost}re volente
    +Commaunde them your wyll
  En tele maniere:
    In suche manere:
  “Margote, prengne de largent,
    “Margret, take of the siluer,
  Va a la boucherye,
    Goo to the flesshshamels,                      8
  Sy achates de lechar.”
    Bye ther of the flessh.”
  Celle respondera:
    She shall ansuer agayn:
  “Quelles chars voules vous?
    “What flesshe wyll ye?
  Voules vous chars de porc
    Wylle ye flessh of porke                      12
  A le verde saulsse?
    With the grene sauce?
  Char du buef salle
    Flessh of bueff salted
  Serra bonne a la moustard;
    Shall be good with the mustard;
  La Fresshe aux aulx.
    The fressh with gharlyk.                      16
  Se mieulx ames
    Yf ye better loue
  Char de mouton[1] ou daigniel,
    Flessh of moton or of lambe,

    [Footnote 1: monton]

  De genise ou de viel,
    Of an hawgher or of a calfe,
  soit rosty ou au browet,
    Is it rosted, orels with browet,              20
  Je lachateray voulentiers.”
    I shall bye it with good wyll.”
  “Nennil[2], mais achatte
    “Nay, but bye
  Char de bachon ou de chieuerel;
    Flessh of bacon or of a gheet;

    [Footnote 2: Nenuil]

  Si nous bargaigne
    So chepe for vs                               24
  De la venyson,
    Of the venyson,
  Soyt de porc sengler,
    Be it of wylde boor,
  Soyt de serf ou de bisse;
    Be it of herte, of hyndecalf;
  Sy latourne au noir poiure
    Dyght it with broun pepre                     28
  Quand tu larras achatte.
    Whan thou shalt haue bought it.
  +Va en la poillaillerie,
    +Goo into the pultrie,
  Achatte de poulletis,
    Bye poullettis,
  Une poulle & deux pouchins,
    One poullet & two chekens,                    32
  Mais nulle chappon
    But no capon
  Ne nul coc napportes,
    Ne no cocke bringe not,
  Ne plouuier,
    Ne plouier,
  Wydecos, roussignoulz,
    Wodecoks, nyghtyngalis,                       36

[Sidenote: P. 10.]

  Maussons, masanges,
    Sparowes, meesen,
  Auwes, annettes,
    Ghees, doukes,
  Coulons, piuions,
    Dowues, pygeons,
  Boutoirs, tourterolles,
    Butores, turtellis,                           40

[[11]]
[Headnote: BIRDS; BEASTS BAD TO EAT, AND NOT EATEN; FISHES.]

  Limoges, pertris,
    Heth hennes, partrichs,
  Alouwes, paons,
    Larkes, pecoks,
  Chuynes, cignes,
    Storkes, swannes,
  Vieses gelines:--
    Olde hennes:--                                 4


  ++IE suis malade,
    ++I am seeke,
  Tel char me greueroit;
    Suche flessh shold greue me;
  Je ne le poroye digerer.”
    I shall not mowe dygeste it.”
  “Sire, vous men aues
    “Syre, ye haue to me                           8
  Biaucop plus nommes
    Many mo named
  Que ien cuide achatter.
    Than I wende to bye.
  Vous estes si tenres,
    Ye be so tendre,
  +Vous pourries maisement
    +Ye may euyll                                 12
  Menger char de cheuaulx,
    Ete flessh of horses,
  De tors, de muletz,
    Of bulles, of mules,
  De poutrains, de iuments.”
    Of coltes, of mares.”
  +Encores sont aultres bestes
    +Yet ben ther othir bestes                    16
  Dont on na cure de mengier:
    Wherof men recche not to ete:
  Loups, reynards, fouines,
    Wulues, foxes, fichews,
  Olifans, lupars, catz,
    Olifa{u}nts, lupardis, cattes,
  Singes, asnes, chiens.
    Apes, asses, houndes.                         20
  Ourse mengue on bien;
    A bere, men ete well;
  Si faitton chieures.
    So doo men ghotes.
  +On ne mengue point
    +Men ete not
  Aigles, griffons,
    Eygles, griffons,                             24
  Espreuiers, faucons,
    Sperhawkes, faucons,
  Oistoirs, escouffles.
    Haukes, kytes.
  Des bestes venimeuses:--
    Of bestes venemous:--
  Serpens, lasartz, scorpions,
    Serpentes, lizarts, scorpions,                28
  Mouches, veers;
    Flies, wormes;
  Qui de ces veers sera morse
    Who of thise wormes shall be byten
  Il luy fauldra triacle;
    He must have triacle;
  Se ce non, il en moroit.
    Yf not that, he shall deye.                   32
  Or apres ores des poissons.
    Now herafter shall ye here of fissh.


  ++DEs poissons poez oyer
    ++OF the fisshes may ye here
  Les noms daulcuns,
    The names of somme,
  Non mie de trestouts,
    Not of alle,                                  36
  Car je ne les sca{ur}oye
    For I ne wote not
  Comment tres tous cognoistre[1];
    How alle to knowe;

    [Footnote 1: coguoistre]

[Sidenote: P. 11.]

  Ainsi ne font les maronners.
    Also ne doo not the maroners.
  Premiers des poissons de mer:
    First of fisshes of the see:                  40

[[12]]
[Headnote: NAMES OF SEA AND RIVER-FISH, AND OF WHITE MEATS.]

  +De la mer vous viennent
    +Fro the see to you come
  Balainnes, porc de mer,
    Whales, pourpays,
  Cabellau, plays, esclefins,
    Coddelyng, plays, haddoks,
  Sugles, rayes,
    Sooles, thornbaks,                            4
  Merlens, esparlens, rouges,
    Whityng, sprotte, rogettis,
  Maqueriaulx, mulets,
    Makerell, molettis,
  Bresmes, aloses, esturgeon,
    Bremes, alouses, sturgeon,
  Frescz herencs, congres,
    Fressh hering, congres,                        8
  Herencs sorees.
    Reed heeryng.
  +Daultre poissons
    +Of othir fisshes
  De riuieres, mengíes:
    Of the river, ete:
  Carpres, anguilles,
    Carpes, eelis,                                12
  Lu[c]es, becques, becquets,
    Luses, pikes, pikerellis,
  Tenques, perques,
    Tenches, perches,
  Roches, creuiches,
    Roches, creuyches,
  Loques, gouuions,
    Loches, gogeorns,                             16
  Saulmon de pluiseurs maniers,
    Samon of diuerse maners,
  Saulmon de la meuse,
    Samon of the mase,
  Saulmon de scoche,
    Samon of scotland,
  Garnars, oysters, moules.
    Shrimpes, oystres, muskles.                   20
  Qui plus en scet plus, en no{m}me;
    Who knoweth more, name he more;
  Car ie ne scay de plus parler.
    For I ne knowe no more to speke.


  ++OR nommons les compenages
    ++NOw name we the white mete
  Et ce quon en fait.
    And that wherof is made.                      24
  Premierment laict et bure,
    First mylke and butter,
  Fromages dengletere,
    Chese of englond,
  Fromages de champayne,
    Chese of champayne,
  De brye, de berghes,
    Of brye, of berowe,                           28
  De vaches, de brebys,
    Of kien, of sheep,
  Fromages de chieueres;
    Chese of gheet;
  Oefs de gelynes, dauwe,
    Egges of hennes, of ghees,
  Oefs dannettes.
    Egges of dokes.                               32
  De laict et doefs
    Of mylke and of egges
  Faitton flans;
    Men make flawnes;
  De laict[1] bouly a le flour
    Of mylke soden with the flour
  Faitton rastons,
    Men make printed cakes,                       36

    [Footnote 1: laicts]

  Et de chars pastees;
    And of flessh pasteyes;
  De craisme faitton bure;
    Of kreme make me butter;
  De laict de brebis
    Of the mylke of sheep
  Faitton gaufres;
    Make men wafres;                              40

[[13]]
[Headnote: NAMES OF FRUITS, TREES, HERBS, AND POT-HERBS.]

[Sidenote: P. 12.]

  Wasteletz, rastons,
    Wastles, eyrekakis,
  Furent oublies.
    Were forgeten.


  ++DE fruit ores no{m}mer
    ++OF fruit shall ye here named
  Poires, pommes, prounes,
    Peres, apples, plommes,                        4
  Cherises, fourd[r]ines,
    Cheryes, sloes,
  Moures, freses, noix,
    Morberies, strawberies, notes,
  Pesques, nesples,
    Pesshes, medliers,
  Figes, roisin,
    Fyggis, reysins,                              8
  Amandes, dades.
    Almandes, dates.


  ++LEs noms des arbres:
    ++THe names of trees:
  Porrier, pommier, cherisier,
    Pere tree, apple tree, cherye tree,
  Pesquier, figier, mourier,
    Pesshe tree, fygtree, morbery tree,           12
  Nesplier, prounier[1], chesne,
    Medliertree, plomtree, ooke,
  Fresne, gaucquier, Oliuier
    Asshe, nokertree, olyuetree,
  Saulx, espinier, palmier.
    Wylough, thorne, palmetree.

    [Footnote 1: pronnier]

  +Desoubz ces arbres
    +Vnder thise trees                            16
  Sont herbes souef[2] flairans.
    Ben herbes suete smellyng.

    [Footnote 2: sonef]

  Il ya roses vermeilles, blances,
    There ben roses reed, white,
  Mente, confite, et graine,
    Mynte, confyte, and grayne,
  Fleurdelyts, ouppe,
    Lelyes, hoppes,                               20
  Et hayes es prets.
    And hedges in medowes.
  +Es boys sont[3] les verdures,
    +In wodes ben the verdures,
  Grouseillers, grouselles,
    Brembles, bremble beries,
  Les treuue on souuent
    Ther is founden ofte                          24
  En gardins sur les mottes.
    In gardyns on the mottes.

    [Footnote 3: sout]

  +Ens es preets est herbes
    +Within the medewis is the grasse
  Dont[4] on fait faing;
    Wherof men make heye;

    [Footnote 4: Dout]

  Sy a des cardons et ortyes;
    So ben ther thistles and nettles;             28
  +Encore sont en les gardins
    +Yet ben in the gardynes
  Rouges coulles et blanches,
    Rede cool and white,
  Porions, oignons[5],
    Porreette, oynyons,

    [Footnote 5: oiguons]

  Betes, cherfeul, persin,
    Betes, cheruyll, persely,                     32
  Saulge, ysope, tymon,
    Sauge, ysope, tyme,
  Laittues, pourcelaine,
    Letews, porselane,
  Querson, gelouffre,
    Kersses, geloffres,
  Naueaulx[6], aulx, feneulle,
    Rapes, gharlyk, fenell,                       36
  Espinces, borages.
    Spynache, borage.

    [Footnote 6: Naneaulx]


  ++CE sont les pottages:
    ++THise ben the potages:
  Poys, feues;
    Pesen, benes;                                 40
  Garnee quon fait de bled,
    Furmente whiche is made of whete,

[[14]]
[Headnote: COMMON DRINKS.--MARCHANDISE OF CLOTHS.]

  Chaudel pour les malades,
    Caudell for the seke,
  Gruwell et porrees.
    Growell and wortes.


[Sidenote: P. 13.]

  ++CE so{u}nt les buuraiges:
    ++THise ben the drynkes:
  Vin de rin et dausay[1],
    Rynyssh wyn and of elzeter,                    4

    [Footnote 1: dansay]

  Vin de beane et de germole,
    Wyn of beane and of germole,
  Vin fransoys et de spayne,
    Frenssh wyn and of spayne,
  Muskadel & bastard,
    Muscadel and bastard,
  Vin dosoye et de garnate,
    Wyn of oseye and of garnade,                   8
  Vin de gascoyne,
    Wyn of gascoyne,
  Maluesye, romenye,
    Malueseye, romeneye,
  Vin cuit, vin gregois;
    Wyn soden, wyn greek;
  Ypocras & clarey sont fait
    Ypocras and clarey ben made                   12
  De vin & bonnes espices;
    Of wyn and good spices;
  Blanc vin, vin vermeil,
    White wyn, rede wyn,

    [Footnote: (Cx. mermeil)]

  Miel, mies,
    Hony, mede,
  Seruoise dangletere,
    Ale of englond,                               16
  Seruoise dalemayne;
    Byre of alemayne;
  Sydre est fait de pommes;
    Syther is made of apples;
  Boulie est faitte
    Boulye is made
  Diauwe & de leuain,
    Of water and of leuayn,                       20
  Et de tercheul.
    And of wurte.
  Fontaine boit on bien.
    Welle watre drynke me well,
  Liauwe boiuent les bestes;
    Watre drynke the bestes;
  Si bue[2] on les toilles.
    So wesshe me with all lynnenclothis.          24

    [Footnote 2: buc]




[Sidenote: [CH. V.]]

  ++DAultres choses sa{u}ns attendre,
    ++OF othir thinge withoute taryeng,
  Endementiers quil me souuient,
    Whiles that I remembre,
  Vous veul deuiser et aprendre.
    I wyll to you deuise and teche.
  Se vous voules bergaignier
    Yf ye wyll bergayne                           28
  Draps ou aultres marchandisses,
    Wullen cloth or othir marchandise,
  Sy alles a le halle
    So goo to the halle
  Qui est ou marchiet;
    Whiche is in the market;
  Sy montes les degretz;
    So goo vpon the steyres;                      32
  La trouueres les draps:
    There shall ye fynde the clothes:
  Draps mesles,
    Clothes medleyed,
  Rouge drap ou vert,
    Red cloth or grene,
  Bleu asuret,
    Blyew y-asured,                               36
  Gaune, vermeil,
    Yelow, reed,
  Entrepers, moret,
    Sad blew, morreey,
  Royet, esquiekeliet,
    Raye, chekeryd,
  Saye blanche & bleu,
    Saye white and blew,                          40

[[15]]
[Headnote: HOW TO BUY CLOTH. HE TRIES TO BEAT HER DOWN.]

  Escarlate en grain.
    Scarlet in grayne.


  ++SY poes commencer
    ++SO may ye begynne
  Par tele salutation
    By suche gretyng
  Co{m}me il est en primier chapitle.
    As it is in the first chapitre.                4

[Sidenote: P. 14.]

  “Dame, que faittes vous laulne
    “Dame, what hold ye the elle
  De ces draps,
    Of this cloth?
  Ou que vault le drap entier?
    Or what is worth the cloth hole?
  Embrief parler, combien laulne?”
    In shorte to speke, how moche thelle?”         8
  “Sire, rayson;
    “Syre, resone;
  Ie vous en feray rayson;
    I shall doo to you resone;
  Vous layres au bon marchie.”
    Ye shall haue it good cheep.”
  “Voir, pour cattel,
    “Ye, truly, for catell,                       12
  Dame, il conuient[1] gaignier.
    Dame, me must wynne.

    [Footnote 1: coniuent]

  Gardes que ien paiera.”
    Take hede what I shall paye.”
  “Quatre soulz de laulne,
    “Four shelynges for the elle,
  Sil vous plaist.”
    Yf it you plese you.”                         16
  “Ce ne seroit mie sens.
    “Hit ne were no wysedom.
  Pour tant vouldroie je auoir
    For so moche wold I haue
  Bonne[2] escarlate!”
    Good scarlete!”

    [Footnote 2: Bonue]

  “Vous aues droit,
    “Ye haue right                                20
  Se vous puisses.
    Yf ye maye.
  Mais iay encore tel
    But I haue yet somme
  Qui nest mie du meillour,
    Whiche is not of the beste,
  Que ie ne donroye point
    Whiche I wold not yeue                        24
  Pour sept souldz.”
    For seuen shelynges.”
  “Je vous en croys bien;
    “I you bileue well;
  Mais ce nest mye drap
    But this is no suche cloth
  De tant dargent,
    Of so moche money,                            28
  Ce scaues vous bien!
    That knowe ye well!
  Ce que vous en laires
    This that ye shall leue
  Le sera[3] vendre.”
    Shall be solde.”

    [Footnote 3: See the Notes.]

  “Sire, que vault il?”
    “Syre, what is it worth?”                     32
  “Dame, il me vauldroit
    “Dame, it were worth to me
  Bien trois souls.”
    Well thre shellyngs.”
  “Cest mal offert,
    “That is euyll boden,
  Ou trop demande;
    Or to moche axed;                             36
  Encores ameroie mieulx
    Yet had I leuer
  Quil fust dor in vostre escrin.”
    That it were gold in your cheste.”
  “Damoyselle, vous ne perderes
    “Damoyselle, ye shold not lese theron
  Ja croix;
    Neuer a crosse;                               40

[[16]]
[Headnote: HOW TO BUY CLOTH. THE METER NOT CALLED FOR.]

  Mais dittes acertes
    But saye certainly
  Comment je lauray
    How shall I haue it
  Sa{u}ns riens laissier.”
    Withoute thyng to leue.”
  “Je le vous donray a vng mot:
    “I shall gyue it you at one worde:             4
  Certes, se vous le aues,
    Certaynly, if ye haue it,
  Vous en paieres chinq souls
    Ye shall paye fyue shellyngs

[Sidenote: P. 15.]

  De tant daulnes
    For so many elles
  Que vous en prenderes;
    Whiche ye shall take;                          8
  Car ie nen[1] lairay riens[2].”
    For I wyll abate no thyng.”

    [Footnote 1: neu]

    [Footnote 2: rieus]

  “Dame, que vaudroit dont
    “Dame, what shall auaylle thenne
  Longues parolles?
    Longe wordes?
  Tailles pour moy une pair de robes.”
    Cutte for me a pair of gounes.”               12
  “Combien en tailleray ie?”
    “How moche shall I cutte?”
  “Tant que vous quidies
    “Also moche as ye wene
  Que mestier mest
    As me shall nede
  Pour vng sourcote,
    For a surcote,                                16
  Pour vng cotte,
    For a cote,
  Pour vne heucque,
    For an hewke,
  Pour vne paire de chausses.”
    For a pair hosen.”
  “Sire, il vous en fauldra[3]
    “Sir, it you behoueth                         20
  Bien quinse aulnes.”
    Well fiften elles.”

    [Footnote 3: enfauldra]

  “De par dieu, tailles les.
    “In goddes name, cutte them.
  De quelle largesse est il?”
    Of what brede is it?”
  “De deulx aulnes et demye.”
    “Of two ellis and an half.”                   24
  “Cest bonne largesse.
    “That is good brede.
  Tailles a lautre deboute.”
    Cutte at that othir ende.”
  “Cest tout ung, par mon alme!
    “Hit is all one, by my soule!
  Mais ie le feroy volentiers.”
    But I shall doo it gladly.”                   28
  “Dame, messures bien.”
    “Dame, mete well.”
  “Sire, ie ne men confesseray ia
    “Sire, I shall never shriue me therof
  De ce que ie vous detenray.”
    Of that I shall with-holde yow.”
  “Dame, ce scay ie bien;
    “Dame, that knowe I well;                     32
  Si ie ne vous creusse
    If I had not trusted you
  Ieuis appelle le messureur.”
    I had called the metar.”
  “Sire, sil vous plaist,
    “Sire, yf it plese you,
  On lappellera.”
    He shall be called.”                          36
  “Nennil[4] voir, dame,
    “Nay truly, dame,
  Ie me tieng bien
    I holde me well
  Content de vous;
    Content with you;

    [Footnote 4: Nenuil]

  Car il me semble
    For me semeth                                 40

[[17]]
[Headnote: PAYING THE BILL.--ENGLISH GROATS, FLEMISH COINS, ETC.]

  Que vous maues[1] bien fait.
    That ye haue to me well done.

    [Footnote 1: manes]

  Ployes le de par dieu.”
    Folde it up in goddes name.”
  “Non[2] feray, sauue le vostre grace;
    “I shall not, sauf your grace;
  Je veul que vous messures.”
    I wyll that ye mete it.”                       4

    [Footnote 2: Nou]

  “Dame, puis que ie me tieng
    “Dame, syth that I me holde
  Plainement content,
    Playnly content,
  Et puis que bien me souffist,
    And sith it well me suffyseth,
  Il nest besoin de le remesurer.
    It is no nede to mete it agayn.                8

[Sidenote: P. 16.]

  Tien, valton, si le porte,
    Holde thou, boye, and bere it;
  Tu auras vng mayll.
    Thou shalt haue an halfpeny.
  Or, dame, combien monte
    Now, dame, how moche cometh it to,
  Ce que iay de vous?”
    This that I haue of you?”                     12
  “Sire, se vous me baillies
    “Syre, yf ye gyue to me
  Disenoof souls,
    xix shellyngs,
  Vous me paieries bien;
    Ye shall paye me well;
  Tant me debues vous.”
    So moche ye owe me.”                          16
  “Damoyselle, tenez, comptez.”
    “Damoyselle, holde, telle.”
  “Quelle monnoye
    “What moneye
  Me donnez vous?”
    Gyue ye to me?”
  “Bonne monnoye;
    “Good moneye;                                 20
  Ce sont gros dangletere;
    Thise ben grotes of englond;
  Tels y a[3] de flaundres;
    Suche ther be of flaundres;

    [Footnote 3: ya]

  Patards et demi patards;
    Plackes and half plackes;
  Les vieulx gros dangletere
    The olde grotes of englond                    24
  Qui valent chincque deniers;
    Which be worth v pens;
  Les noueaulx valent iiij. deniers;
    The newe be worth foure pens;
  Vous le debues bien scavoir,
    Ye ought well to knowe,
  Qui tant dargent recepues.”
    That so moche moneye receyue[6].”             28

    [Footnote 6: receyne]

  “Vous dittes voir, sire.”
    “Ye saye trouthe, sire.”
  “Mais vous ameries mieulx
    “But ye had leuer
  Florins[4] du rin,
    Rynysh guldrens,

    [Footnote 4: Florius]

  Escutz du roy,
    Scutes of the kyng,                           32
  Royaulx nobles dangletere,
    Ryallis nobles of englond,
  Salutz door lyons,
    Salews of gold lyons,
  Viez estrelins deniers.”
    Olde sterlingis pens.”
  “Cest tout bonne monneye;
    “This is all good moneye;                     36
  Mais que ie le puisse doner?”
    Ye, and I may gyue it oute?”
  “Oyl, vous lez donerez[5] bien
    “Yes, ye shall gyue it oute well
  Dedains la ville
    Within the toune
  Et par tout le pays,
    And all aboute the contre,                    40

    [Footnote 5: alonerez]

[[18]]
[Headnote: THE SELLER PLEASED. CLOTH OF MANY TOWNS.]

  En touttes denrees,
    In all peny worthes,
  En touttes marchandyses.”
    In all marchandyses.”
  “Biau sire, ie me loe de vous;
    “Fair sire, I am well plesyd with you;
  Si que sil vous falloit
    Were it so that ye failled                     4
  Aulcune denree
    Ony ware
  Dont ie me mesle,
    Of whiche I medle with,
  Ou que jay entremayns,
    Or that I haue under hande,
  Vous le pourries emporter
    Ye may bere it a-waye                          8
  Sans[1] maille sans[2] denier;
    Withoute halpeny or peny;
  Sy bien maues paiet.”
    So well haue ye me payd.”

    [Footnote 1: Saus]

    [Footnote 2: saus]

[Sidenote: P. 17.]

  “Tres grand merchis!
    “Right grete gramercy!
  Sachies que mon argent
    Wyte ye that[4] my siluer                     12
  Vous aries deuant[3] ung aultre.
    Ye shall haue tofore an othir.

    [Footnote 4: that that]

    [Footnote 3: denant]

  Ce seroit droit
    Hit were right
  Pour vostre debonairete,
    For your goodlynes,
  Pour la courtoysie
    For the courtosye                             16
  Qui est en vous.”
    That is in you.”
  “Ce nest mye
    “It ne[5] is not
  Le derrain argent
    The last siluer
  Que vous ares de moy,
    That ye shal haue of me,                      20
  Comment ce que soit le premier.
    How be it that this is the first.

    [Footnote 5: en]


  ++CAr il men fault ale fois,
    ++FOr me behoueth othir while,
  Et as mes compaignons,
    And to my felaws,
  Draps de maintes manires,
    Clothes of many maneris,                      24
  De pluiseurs villes,
    Of many tounes,
  De loundres, de euerwik,
    Of london, of yorke,
  De bristow, de bathon,
    Of bristow, of bathe,
  De paris, de roaen,
    Of parys, of roen,                            28
  De bruges, de gaund,
    Of brugges, of gaunt,
  De ypres, de tournay,
    Of ypre, of dornyk,
  De lylle, de dixmude,
    Of ryselle, of dixmuthe,
  De menin, de comines,
    Of menyn, of comynes,                         32
  De bailloil, de poperinghes,
    Of belle, of poperyng,
  De denremond, daloste,
    Of dendremonde, of aloste,
  De saincte omer, de valenciene,
    Of saint omers, of valensynes,
  Des brouxellis, de malins,
    Of brussels, of mechelyne,                    36
  De louuain, danuers.
    Of louayn, of andwerp.


  ++AInsi ie pense a aller,
    ++ALso I thinke to goo,
  Sil plaist a dieu,
    Yf it plaise to god,
  A le feste de bruges,
    To the feste of bruges,                       40

[[19]]
[Headnote: NAMES OF FAIRS, WOOL, HIDES, SKINS, SPICES.]

  A le feste danuers,
    To the marte of andwarp,
  A le feste[1] de berghes,
    To the marte of berow,

    [Footnote 1: festes]

  A le feste de sterebrige,
    To the faire of sterbrigge,
  A le feste de salesburye,
    To the faire of salesbury,                     4
  A le feste de seynct bertilmeu
    To seint bartilmews faire
  Que serra a loundres,
    Whiche shall be at london,
  A le dedicacion de challons,
    To the chirchehalyday of chalons,
  A le foire de cambrige,
    To the faire of cambrigge,                     8
  A le procession de Westmonaistre,
    To the procession of Westmestre,
  A le procession general.
    To the procession general.


  ++SI achatteray des laines.”
    ++ANd I shall bye wulle.”
  “Coment donnes vous le poise?
    “How gyue ye the waye?                        12

[Sidenote: P. 18.]

  Que voules vous auoir du clau?
    What wyll ye haue of the nayll?
  Que donrai ie de la pierre?
    What shall I gyue for the stone?
  Que vault la liure
    What is worth the pound
  De cest laine daygneaulx?”
    Of this wulle of lambes?”                     16
  Vous responderes
    Ye shall ansuere
  Ainsi que est escript ailleurs.
    Also as it is wreton els where.


  ++ENcore ne lairoi ie mie
    ++YEt shall I not leue it
  Que ie ne achatte
    That I ne bye                                 20
  Peaulx de vaches,
    Hydes of kyen,
  De quoy on fait cuyr.
    Wherof men make lether.
  De peaulx de chieures ou de bouk
    Of fellis of gheet or of the bukke
  Faitton bon cordewan;
    Make men good cordewan;                       24
  De peaulx de brebis
    Of shepes fellis
  Peult estre fait le basenne;
    May be made the basenne;
  Si en faitton parcemin
    So make men also perchemyn
  En quoy on escript.
    In whiche men write.                          28
  Or aues oyet
    Now haue ye herd
  Des draps, des laines,
    Of clothes, of wulle,
  Des peaulx, et des cuyrs
    Of fellis, and of lether,
  Tout en ung chapitle.
    Alle in one chapitre.                         32




[Sidenote: [CH. VI.]]

  ++POur ce que ie ne suy
    ++FOr that I am not
  Especier ne apoticaire,
    Spycier ne apotecarie
  Ne scay mie nommer
    I can not name
  Touttes manieres despeces;
    All maneres of spyces;                        36
  Mais ien nomerai vne partie:
    But I shall name a partie:
  Gingembre, galigan,
    Gynger, galingale,
  Cubelles, saffran,
    Cubibes, saffran,
  Poiure, commin,
    Pepre, comyne,                                40

[[20]]
[Headnote: NAMES OF POWDERS, OILS, WAX, WRITING-TABLES, ETC.]

  Chucre blanc & brun,
    Sugre white and broun,
  Fleur de cammelle,
    Flour of cammelle,
  Anijs, graine de paradis;
    Anyse, graynes of paradys;
  De ces choses faitton confections
    Of thise thinges be made confections           4
  Et bonnes pou[d]res,
    And good poudres,
  De quoy on fait
    Wherof is made
  Bonnes sausses
    Good sausses
  Et electuaires de medicine.
    And electuaries for medicines.                 8


  ++OR dirons nous des oyles.
    ++NOw shall we saye of the oyles.
  Oyle doliue & de semaile,
    Oyle of olyue and of feldeseed,
  Oyle doliette & de nauette,
    Oyle of mecop and of rapeseed,
  Oyle de lingnuyse,
    Oyle of lynseed,                              12
  Oyle de chenneue;
    Oyle of hempseed;
  Sy faitton moustarde.
    And men make mustard.


[Sidenote: P. 19.]

  ++IE achatteray choses
    ++I Shall bye thinges
  Dont on fait pointures:
    Wherof ben made paintures:                    16
  Asur et vert de spaigne
    Asure and grene of spayne,
  Vermeyllon, brezil,
    Vermeyllon, brasyll,
  Vernis, orpiement.
    Vernysshe, orpement.


  ++ENcore ie veul emploier
    ++YEt I wyll bystowe                          20
  Ung somme dargent en sel,
    A somme of siluer in salte,
  En poit, en harpoit,
    In pycche, in rosyn,
  En verde chire,
    In grene waxe,
  En rouge et gaune chire,
    In rede & yelow waxe,                         24
  En noir chire,
    In black waxe,
  De quoy on emplist
    Wherof be fyllyd
  Les tables
    The tables
  En quoy on aprend
    In which men teche                            28
  Les enfans escripre;
    The children to write;
  Et du sieu,
    And of siewet,
  Saing du porc
    The fatte of a swyne
  Pour faire pottages;
    For to make potages;                          32
  Saing de herencs;
    Sayme of hereng;
  On en oint les sorles.
    Men enoynte therwyth shoes.


  ++SE je treuue del alun,
    ++IF I fynde alume,
  Jen achatteray par balles,
    I shall bye by bales,                         36
  Car il appertient en la taincture;
    For it belongeth in the dyerye;
  Guades et guarance.
    Wood and mader.
  Mais comment que ie
    But how that I
  Moy entremelle
    Me entremete                                  40

[[21]]
[Headnote: MEASURES, WEIGHTS, METALS AND OTHER WARES.]

  A faire ce liure,
    To make this book,
  Et ie sache une partie
    And I know a partie
  Coment on no{m}me les choses;
    How men name the thinges;
  Pour ce ie ne scay mie
    Therfor I ne wote not                          4
  Comment ne pour combien
    How ne for how moche
  Que on vent les biens,
    That men selle the goodes,
  Par mesure ou par poix,
    By mesure or by weyght,
  Par quarters ou par sestiers,
    By quarters or by sextiers,                    8
  Par liures ou par demy liures,
    By poundes or by half poundes,
  Ou par onches,
    Or by vnces,
  Par ballances ou par to{n}niaulx,
    By balances or by barellis,
  Par vassiaulx ou par balles,
    By vessellis or by bales,                     12
  Par sacs ou par quierques.
    By sackes or by lastes.
  Si que chil
    So that he
  Que scauoir le veult
    That wyll knowe it
  Il le pourra demander
    He may axe it                                 16

[Sidenote: P. 20.]

  Aux marchans
    At the marchans
  Qui bien le sceuent.
    Whiche well knowe it.


  ++ENcore ie nay mye
    ++YEt I haue not
  Nomme les metaulx
    named the metals                              20
  Qui sensieuent[1]:
    Whiche folowe:

    [Footnote 1: seusiuent]

  Fer, achier, plomb, estain,
    Yron, steell, leed, tynne,
  Keuure & arain,
    Coppre and bras,
  Or, argent, choses dorees,
    Gold, siluer, thinges gylt,                   24
  Choses dargentees,
    Thinges siluerid,
  Coroyes a claux dargent,
    Gyrdellis with nayles of siluer,
  Sainture de soye
    Corse of silke
  A boucle dargent,
    With bocle of siluer,                         28
  Boursses ouuries a leguille.
    Purses wrought with the nedle.


  ++CHe sont marchandises:
    ++THise ben marchandises:
  Eguilles, espengles,
    Nedles, pynnes,
  Aloyeres, tasses,
    Pawteners, tasses,                            32
  Coffyns & escriptoires,
    Coffyns and penners,
  Alesnes, graffes,
    Alles, poyntels,
  Cornets[2] a encre,
    Enke hornes,
  Coutiaulx[3], forches,
    Knyues, sheres,                               36

    [Footnote 2: Coruets]

    [Footnote 3: Contiaulx]

  Huuettes de soye,
    Huues of silke,
  Coyfes dhommes,
    Coyfes for men,
  Pendoyrs de soye,
    Pendants of silke,
  Lachets, lannieres,
    Laces, poyntes,                               40

[[22]]
[Headnote: SILKS. GRAINS. TITLES OF NOBILITY.]

  Soye vermeylle,
    Reed silke,
  Verde, gaune,
    Grene, yelowe,
  noire soye;
    Black silke;
  De ces soyes
    Of thise silkes                                4
  Faitton bordures.
    Make me broythures.


  ++CHi feray ie fin,
    ++HEre I shall make an ende,
  Et diray des graines:
    And shall saye of graynes:
  Bled, fourment,
    Corn, whete,                                   8
  Soille, orge,
    Rye, barlye,
  Auaynne, vesches,
    Otes, vessches,
  Feues, poys.
    Benes, pesen.
  De ces choses suy ie lasses,
    Of thise thinges I am wery,                   12
  Si que ie men reposeray.
    So that I shall reste me.




[Sidenote: [CH. VII.]]

  ++MAis les grandes seigneurs no{m}meray;
    ++BUt the grete lordes I shall name;
  Les prelats de saincte eglise;
    The prelats of holy chirche;
  Les princes, les grandes seigneurs.
    The princes, the grete lordes.                16
  Premiers des plus haulx:
    Fyrst of the hyest:
  Cest de nostre saint pere
    That is of our holy fadre

[Sidenote: P. 21.]

  Le pape de romme,
    The pope of rome,
  Qui demeure a auignon;
    Which duelleth at auynyon;                    20
  Qui par droit deuroit estre
    That by right shold be
  A grand romme.
    At grete rome.
  Apres est le empereur
    Next is the emperour
  Le plus grand seigneur,
    The grettest lorde,                           24
  Lemperesse greigneur dame,
    Themperesse the grettest lady,
  De tout le monde;
    Of all the world;
  Elle est royne dallemaygne.
    She is quene of almayne.
  Le roy de fraunce
    The kyng of fraunce                           28
  Est le plus riche roy
    Is the most riche kyng
  De tresour qui vist
    Of tresour that lyueth
  De la la mer;
    Beyonde the see;
  Le roy dangletere apres
    The kyng of englond after                     32
  Est le plus puissance & riche.
    Is the most myghty and riche.
  Le roy de spayne,
    The kyng of spayne,
  Le roy darragon,
    The kyng of aragon,
  Le roy de cecile,
    The kyng of cecile,                           36
  Le roy de nauare,
    The kyng of nauerne,
  Le roy de behaine,
    The kyng[1] of beme,

    [Footnote 1: byng]

  Le roy de polaine,
    The kyng of poole,

[[23]]
[Headnote: KINGS. DIGNITARIES OF THE CHURCH, MONKS, ETC.]

  Le roy de dace,
    The kyng of denmarke,
  Le roy de portingal,
    The kyng of portingale,
  Le roy de scoce,
    The kyng of scotland,
  Le roy de naples,
    The kyng of naples,                            4
  Le roy Jherusalem.
    The kyng of Jherusalem.
  Larcheuesque de cauntorbie,
    Tharchebisshop of caunterbury,
  Larcheuesque deuerwike,
    Tharchebisshop of yorke,
  Larcheuesque de coloine,
    Tharchebisshop of coleyne,                     8
  De rains, de rohen,
    Of raynes, of roen,
  De magonce, de trieris.
    Of mence, of treyer.
  Leuesque de loundres,
    The bisshop of london,
  Leuesque de wincestre,
    The bisshop of wynchestre,                    12
  Leuesque de chestre,
    The bisshop of chestre,
  Leuesque de lincolne,
    The bisshop of lyncolne,
  Leuesque de paris,
    The bisshop of parys,
  Leuesque de senlis,
    The bisshop of senlys,                        16
  Leuesque de biauuaix,
    The bisshop of biauuays,
  Leuesque de liege,
    The bisshop of luke,
  Leuesque de cambray,
    The bisshop of camerik,
  Leuesque de terwaen.
    The bisshop of terrewyn.                      20
  Mais par deseure eulx
    But aboue them

[Sidenote: P. 22.]

  Sont les dousze cardinaulx.
    Ben the xii. cardynals.
  Par desoubz les euesques
    Vnder the bisshoppes
  Sont les abbees,
    Ben the abbotes,                              24
  Les officiaulx,
    The officials,
  Les preuosts, les doyens,
    The prouostes, the denes,
  Les pryeurs, les gardiens.
    The pryours, the wardeyns.
  Desoubs tels maistres
    Vnder suche maisters                          28
  Sont les prebstres.
    Ben the prestes.
  Les channonnes sont renteez;
    The chanons ben rented;
  On veult dyre
    Men wyll saye
  Que vng abbe de clingny
    That an abbot of cluny                        32
  Est le plus riche clercq
    Is the richest clerke
  Qui soit en[1] le monde
    That isin the world
  Apres le pape.
    Next the pope.

    [Footnote 1: on]

  Grys moysnes sont
    Gray monkes ben                               36
  Del ordene de chistiaulx;
    Of the ordre of cistiauls;
  Saint bernard est leur patron.
    Seint bernard is theyr patron.
  Blancs moynes treuue on
    White monkys men fynde
  Del ordene de premonstre;
    Of the ordre of premonstrence;                40

[[24]]
[Headnote: MONKS AND NUNS. THE GREAT ONES OF THE WORLD.]

  Noirs moisnes del ordene
    Blac monkes of the ordre
  Saincte benoit;
    Of seynt benet;
  Guillemynes, freres mineurs,
    Wyllemyns and frere menours,
  Jacopins, chartreurs,
    Blac freris & monkes of chartre ho{us},        4
  Carmes, Augustins,
    White freris and austyns,
  Prescheurs, Bogars,
    Prechers, lewd freris,
  Curats, chappelains,
    Curattes, chappelains,
  Abbesses, prioresses,
    Abbesses, prioresses,                          8
  Nonnains
    Nonnes
  Del ordene saynt clare,
    Of the ordre of seint clare,
  Beghines, clergesses.
    Beghyns, clergesses.


  ++ORes viennent les noms
    ++NOw comen the names                         12
  Des ducs, des countes,
    Of dukes, of erles,
  De duc deuerwik,
    Of the duke of yorke,
  De duc de lancastre,
    Of the duke of lancastre,
  De duc de bretaigne,
    Of the duke of bretaigne,                     16
  De duc de guyhenne,
    Of the duke of guyan,
  De duc de ghelres,
    Of the duke of gheldreland,
  De duc de bourgoigne,
    Of the duke of burgoyne,
  De duc daustrice;
    Of the duke of ostryche;                      20
  Le counte darondel,
    The erle of arondel,
  Le counte de kente,
    The erle of kente,
  Le counte dessex,
    The erle of essex,

[Sidenote: P. 23.]

  Le[1] counte weruy,
    The erle of warwyke,                          24

    [Footnote 1: La]

  Le counte de flaundres,
    The erle of flaundres,
  Le counte de clermont,
    The erle of clermonde,
  De boulougne, de sainct pol,
    Of boloyne, of saint pol,
  De hainau, de holant;
    Of henaud, of holand;                         28
  Chastelain de douures;
    Castelayn of douer;
  Viscounte de biaumont,
    Vycounte[3] of beaumond,
  De bourshier, de berghes,
    Of bousser, of berow,
  Cheualiers, esquiers hardyz.
    Knyghtes, squyers hardy.                      32

    [Footnote 3: Vyconnte]

  Messire ernoul de noirs est banerets[2]
    Sir arnold of noirs is a banerett
  Et fu connestable de fraunce.
    And was conestable of fraunce.

    [Footnote 2: bauerets]

  Messier daspremont
    My lord of aspremond
  Est double banerets.
    is double banerette.                          36
  Les noms des dames:
    The names of ladies:
  La bonne royne,
    The good quene,
  Ducesse, contesse, princesse;
    Duchesse, countesse, princesse;
  Pour teles dames
    For suche ladies                              40

[[25]]
[Headnote: NAMES (WITH FOLK’S TRADES): ADAM--ABRAHAM.]

  Sont les tournoys,
    Ben the tournemens,
  Les Joustemens,
    The Joustynges,
  Les grandes guerres,
    The grete werres,
  De quoy les grands maistres
    Wherof the grete maistres                      4
  D[e] theologie, dastronomye,
    Of diuinite, of astronomye,
  nen ont que faire,
    Have not to doo,
  Et sont en repoz,
    And ben in reste,
  Et les maistres de medicines
    And the maistres of medicyns                   8
  Et les cirurgiens aussi.
    And the surgyens also.




[Sidenote: [CH. VIII.]]

  ++POur ce que pluyseurs mots
    ++FOr this that many wordes
  Cherront ou pourront cheoir
    Shalle fall or may falle
  Qui ne sont point plainement
    Which ben not playnly                         12
  Cy deuant escrips,
    Here tofore wreton,
  Sy vous escripray
    So shall I write you
  Doresenauant
    Fro hens forth
  Diuerses maters
    Diuerse maters                                16
  De touttes choses,
    Of all thynges,
  Puis de lun puis de lautre,
    Syth of one sith of anothir,
  Ou quel chapitle
    In which chapitre  [pp. 25-47]
  Je veul conclure
    I wyll conclude                               20
  Les noms dhommes & des femmes
    The names of men and of wymmen
  Selon lordre del a. b. c.,
    After the ordre of a. b. c.,
  Les noms des mestiers,
    The names of craftes,
  Sy comme vous poes oyer.
    So as ye may here.                            24


[Sidenote: P. 24.]

  “++ADam, amaine cha
    “++ADam, bryng hyther
  Mon cheual tantost,
    My hors anone,
  e luy metz
    And sette on hym
  La selle et le frain.
    The sadel and brydle.                         28
  Ie cheuaucheray
    I shall ryde
  La iay promise a estre
    There I haue promysed to be
  A ung parlement
    To a parlamente
  Ou a ung annyuersaire.
    Or to a yeres mynde.                          32
  Regarde sil est ferres
    Beholde yf he be shoed
  Des quatre piets;
    On four feet;
  Se il nelest,
    Yf he be not,
  Si le maine ferrer.”
    So lede hym to be shoed.”                     36
  “+Abraham, cest faict.
    “+Abraham, hit is done.
  Tenes, montes;
    Holde, sitte vp;
  Chausies vous bousiaux,
    Do on your bootes,
  Vous esperons.
    Your spores.                                  40

[[26]]
[Headnote: ALPHABET OF NAMES: ADRYAN--ANCEL. _Wine._ _Breakfast._]

  Puis vous desiunes
    Syth breke your fast
  Ainchois[1] que vous departes.”
    Er ye hens departe.”

    [Footnote 1: Amchois]

  “+Adryan, ou[2] en ales vous?
    “+Adryan, where well ye goo?

    [Footnote 2: on]

  Se vous alles mon chemyn
    Yf ye goo my way                               4
  Ie vous tenroye companye.”
    I shall holde you companye.”
  “Si en serroye moult Joyeulx.”
    “So shall I be moche glad.”
  “+Alart, or en alons
    “+Alarde, now goo we
  Sans[3] arrester
    Withoute[6] tarieng                            8
  Se nous voulons venir
    If we wylle come
  Ainsi comme nous
    Lyke as we
  Et les aultres auons promis.”
    And the othir haue promised.”

    [Footnote 3: Saus]

    [Footnote 6: Withonte]

  “+Abel, ou vendt on
    “+Abel, where selle men                       12
  Le meillour vin de cest ville?
    The beste wyn of this toune?
  Dictes le nous,
    Saye it vs,
  Nous vous en prions.”
    We pray you.”
  “+Andrieu, le meillour vent on
    “+Andrew, the beste selleth me                16
  A la rue des lombars.
    In the strete of lombardis.
  Car ie lay assaye;
    For I haue assayed;
  Cest dung plein tonniel,
    Hit is of a full fatte,
  Au pris de viij. deniers,
    At pris of viij. pens,                        20
  En le premier tauerne
    And [at] the first tauerne
  Que vous trouueres.”
    That ye shall fynde.”
  “+Andrieu, va querre
    “+Andrew, goo fecche
  Ung quart et demy,
    A quart and an half,                          24
  Et te fais bien mesurer.
    And doo the well to be meten.
  Si buuerons ung trait;
    So shall we drynke a draught;

[Sidenote: P. 25.]

  Nous desiunerons des trippes,
    We shall breke our fast with trippes,
  De la foye, du poumon,
    Of the lyuer, of the longhe,                  28
  Vng piet du buef,
    A foot of an oxe,
  Vng piet du porke,
    A foot of a swyne,
  Vng teste daux;
    An hede of garlyke;
  Se nous desiunerons[4]
    So shall we breke our faste                   32
  Et buuerons becq a becq.”
    And shall drynke becke to beck.”

    [Footnote 4: desiunerous]

  “+Ancel, mets la table
    “+Ancelme, sette the table
  Et les estaulx,
    And the trestles,
  Laue les voirs,
    Wasshe the glasses,                           36
  Respaulme le[5] hanap,
    Spoylle the cuppe,

    [Footnote 5: la]

  Dresce a manger,
    Dresse to ete,
  Taille du pain,
    Cutte brede,
  Laue le mortier
    Wasshe the mortier,                           40

[[27]]
[Headnote: NAMES: ARNOLD--ADRIEN. _Day-work._ _Months of the Year._]

  Et le pestiel,
    And the pestel,
  Fay nous des aulx;
    Make vs somme garlyk;
  Nous en a{ur}ons toute jour
    We shall haue all the day
  Plus chault en nous membres.”
    More hete in our membres.”                     4
  “+Arnoul, verses du vin,
    “+Arnold, gyue us wyne
  Et nous donnes a boire.”
    And gyue vs to drynke.”
  “Non feray; ie poyle des aulx.
    “I shall not, I pylle the gharlyk.
  Alles ainchois[1] lauer;
    Goo erst wasshe;                               8
  Vous beuuries bien a temps.”
    Ye shall drynke well in tyme.”

    [Footnote 1: amchois]

  “+Aubin est a le[2] porte,
    “+Aubin is at the gate,
  Mais al huys.
    But at the dore.

    [Footnote 2: ? la]

  Vase le laisse ens.
    Goo late hym in.                              12
  Je croy quil maporte
    I trowe that he bryngeth me
  Ce quil me doibt.”
    That he me oweth.”
  +Anthoine est ung preudhomme[3];
    +Antonye is a wyse man;
  Il se lieue touts les nuyts
    He ariseth alle the nyghtes                   16
  Pour oyer mattines.
    For to here matynes.

    [Footnote 3: prendhomme]

  Il ne me chault
    Me ne reccheth
  De son matin leuer
    Of his erly risyng
  Ou de son dormier,
    Or of the[5] slepyng,                         20
  Ne de son veiller.
    Ne of his wakyng.

    [Footnote 5: ? his]

  “+Augustin, ou estu?”
    “+Austyn, where art thou?”
  “Il est a lescole.
    “He is at the scole,
  Il sen ala a prime.
    He is goon to prime.                          24
  Il reuendra a tierce,
    He shall come agayn at tyerse,
  Non fera mie[4] a mydy.”
    He shall not at mydday.”

    [Footnote 4: nuie]

  “Or viegne a none.”
    “Now come a none.”
  “Ie vouldroye quil demourast
    “I wolde that he abode                        28

[Sidenote: P. 26.]

  Iusques as vespres,
    Vntil euensonge,
  Voire, iusques a complye;
    Ye truly, vntil complyne;
  Et sil demourast
    And yf he taried
  Iusques a matines
    Vntil matyns                                  32
  Ou iusques a mynuyt,
    Or vntil mydnyght,
  Et sil ne reuenist iamais,
    And yf he come neuer,
  Ie ny acompteroye gaires.”
    I shold not recche moche.”
  “+Adrien, parles a moy:
    “+Adryan, speke to me:                        36
  Combien de moys sont en lan?
    How many monethes ben in the yere?
  Quels sont ils?”
    Which ben they?”
  “Ianuier, Feurier,
    “Janiuer, Feuerer,
  Mars, Apuril,
    Marche, Aprille,                              40

[[28]]
[Headnote: NAMES: AGNES--APPOLINE. _Feasts and Terms._]

  May, Iung,
    Maye, Iuyn,
  Iullet, Aougst,
    Iuyll, August,
  Septembre, Octobre,
    Septembre, Octobre,
  Nouembre, Decembre.”
    Nouembre, Decembre.”                           4


  ++AGnes no meschyne
    ++AGnes our maid
  Scet bien nommer
    Can well name
  Toutes les grandes festes
    All the grete festes
  Et les termes de lan.
    And the termes of the yere.                    8
  “Damoyselle, nommes les.”
    “Damyselle, name them.”
  “Non feray, se dieu mait;
    “I shall not, so god helpe me!
  +Agathe les nommera.”
    +Agace shall name them.”
  “De par dieu, puis quainsi[1] soit!
    “In gods name, sith it soo is!                12

    [Footnote 1: quaiusi]

  A noel, a pasques,
    At cristemasse, at estre,
  Alascension, a la pentechoste,
    At assencion, at Whitsontid,
  La trinite, a la saint iehan,
    The trinite, at seint Johan,
  Le iour de saint piere,
    The day of saint petre,                       16
  A le seint remy,
    At seynt remyge,
  Le iour de tous sains,
    The day of all[5] halowes,

    [Footnote 5: oll]

  A le saint martin,
    At seint martins messe,
  A le saint xpōfre,
    At seint xpriforis,                           20
  A nostre dame en marche,
    At our lady in marche,
  A le chandeloer[2],
    At candlemasse,

    [Footnote 2: chandeber]

  A la nostre dame my aoust,
    At our lady in heruest,
  A quaremien[3],
    At shroftyde,                                 24

    [Footnote 3: quaremiou]

  Le iour de pasques florie,
    The day of palme sonday,
  Le iour de lan,
    The new yers day,
  Le[4] iour des trois roix,
    The day of thre kynges,
  Le[4] peneuse sepmaine,
    The paynful weke,                             28

    [Footnote 4: Les]

  An, demy an,
    Yere, half yere,
  Le iour du sacrament,
    The day of sacrament,

[Sidenote: P. 27.]

  Le procession deuerwik,
    The procession of yorke,
  Le procession de couentre;
    The procession of couentre;                   32
  Les pardons de syon
    The pardon of syon
  Sero{u}nt au commencement daust.”
    Shall be at the begynnyng of august.”
  “+Appoline, venes boire.”
    “+Appolyn, come ete.”
  “Non feray, saulue vostre grace!
    “I ne shall not, sauf your grace!             36
  Encore buuray ie,
    Yet shall I drynke,
  Car ie ne refuse point
    For I reffuse not
  Le hanap
    The cuppe;

[[29]]
[Headnote: NAMES: ANASTASE--ALBERT. _A Three Years’ Peace coming._]

  Ce serroit villonnie.”
    That were vylonye.”
  “+Anastase, aues mengist?”
    “+Anastase, haue ye eten?”
  “Encore dyne ie;
    “Yet I dyne;
  A nuyt soupperay ie.”
    At nyght I shall souppe.”                      4
  “Vous aues bien vo temps
    “Ye haue well your tyme
  Qui si longement
    That so longe
  Estes in solas.”
    Be in solace.”
  “Dennuy de meschance
    “Fro noyeng of meschief                        8
  Me veul garder,
    I wyll kepe me,
  De duel de maise auenture,
    Fro sorow of euil auenture,
  Mais toudis viure en joye
    But alleway lyue in ioye
  Sers mon deduit.”
    Shall be my byledyng.”                        12
  “+Amand, vostre serouge,
    “+Amand, your cosen alyed
  A plus belle amye
    Hath a fairer lyef
  Que vous nayes,
    Than ye haue,
  Et mieulx aprise
    And better taught                             16
  Que ie nen scay nulle;
    Than I knowe ony;
  Elle est belle et sage,
    She is faire and wyse,
  Si quils pourroient auoir
    So that they myght have
  Asses des biens ensamble.”
    Ynough of goodes to gedyr.”                   20
  “+Amelberge est bien plaisante;
    “+Amelbergh is well plaisa{u}nt;
  Dieu luy doinst bon eur!
    God gyue her good happe!
  Ves le cy ou[1] elle vient.”
    See her hiere where she cometh.”

    [Footnote 1: on]

  “Ves moy cy, voirement!
    “See me hiere, veryly!                        24
  Que dittes vous de moy?”
    What saye ye of me?”
  “Nous ne disons de vous
    “We ne saye of you
  Synon que bien.”
    Nothing but good.”
  “+Albert de haesbrouk!
    “+Albright of haesburgh!                      28
  Venes vous de la ville?”
    Come ye fro the toune?”
  “Oyl, sire, sil vous plaist.”
    “Ye, sire, yf it plese you.”
  “Quelles nouuelles
    “What tydynges
  Nous apportes vous?”
    To vs brynge ye?”                             32
  “Bonnes et belles;
    “Good and fair;

[Sidenote: P. 28.]

  Car on dist
    For men saye
  Que paix serra
    That peas shall be
  Entre les deux roys
    Bitwene the two kynges                        36
  Et leurs royames,
    And theyr royames,
  Ou trieues[2] pour trois ans.”
    Or triews for thre yere.”

    [Footnote 2: trienes]

  “Sire, de celle bouche
    “Sir, with that mouth
  Puyssies vin boire.”
    Mote ye wyn drynke.”                          40


[[30]]
[Headnote: NAMES: BAUDEWIN--BERTRAN. _English and Scotch Peace._]

  ++BAudewin le cousin charles
    ++BAudewyn the cosin of charles
  Est mareschal de fraunce.
    Is mareshall of fraunce.
  Il me disoit
    He sayde to me
  Quil sera respyt
    That it shall be respyte                       4
  Entre les engloys
    Bitwene the englisshmen
  Et les escochoys.
    And the scottes.
  Il en a eubt lettres.
    He had therof lettres.
  Benoit le vylain
    Benet the chorle                               8
  Est lieutenant
    Is lieutenant
  Du bailly damiens
    Of the baylly of amyas
  Et de la preuostie.
    And of the prouostye.
  Il est mes parens
    He is my kynnesman                            12
  Et ie le sien;
    And I am his;
  Si men puis vanter.
    So I me auaunte.
  “+Bernard, est le clocque sounee
    “+Bernard, is the clocke sowned
  Pour aller a le euure?”
    For to goo to werke?”                         16
  “Vous[1] voules dire
    “Ye wolde saye
  Le clocque des ouuriers?”
    The belle of werkemen?”

    [Footnote 1: Vons]

  “Non fay, vrayement,
    “I ne doo, truly,
  Mais le clocque du iour.”
    But the day belle.”                           20
  “Oyl, tres grand pieche.”
    “Ye, ouer a grete while.”
  “+Boneface, fais du feu;
    “+Boneface, make fyer,
  Fais bouillir lencre.
    Make the ynche to seethe,
  Si mets plus de galles
    And put therin mo galles                      24
  Et plus de substaunce,
    And more substance,
  Et mouue le qui narde.”
    And styre it that it brenne not.”
  “+Berthelmieu, demores cy
    “+Bertilmewe, abyde hiere
  Auecques nous huymais.
    With vs this day.                             28
  Nous vous donrons[2]
    We shall gyue you
  De ce que nous avons[3],
    Of that we haue,
  Et de ce que dieu nous a preste.
    And of that which god hath lente vs.

    [Footnote 2: donrous]

    [Footnote 3: a vons]

  Si vous fera on
    So men make to you                            32
  Ung biau lite;
    A fayr bedde;
  Vous ne aures pys
    Ye shall haue no werse
  Que nous mesmes.”
    Than we our self.”

[Sidenote: P. 29.]

  “+Bertran, ce seroit asses;
    “+Bertram, this shall be ynough;              36
  Car se il ny auoit
    For yf he haue
  Fors que du pain
    Nothing than brede
  Et bon ceruoyse
    And good ale
  Il me souffiroit,
    Hit shold suffyse me,                         40

[[31]]
[Headnote: NAMES: BARNABE--CYPRIEN. _Baking, Washing._]

  Si comme a chescun
    So as to euerich
  Doibt souffire.”
    It ought suffyse.”
  “+Barnabe, alles vous ent!
    “+Barnabe, goo ye hens!
  Nous ne auons cure
    We haue no charge                              4
  De vostre companie.
    Of your felawship.
  Ne vous coroucies point!
    Ne angre you not!
  Car sacies tout a plain
    For knowe ye all plainly
  Que vostre compaignie
    That your felawship                            8
  Nest bonne ne belle.”
    Is not good ne fayr.”
  “+Basilles, que vous couste
    “+Basylle, what hath coste you
  Mon menage,
    My houshold,
  Que vous vous plaindes de moy?”
    That ye playne you of me?”                    12
  “Plaigne ou ne plaigne point,
    “Playne or playne nothyng,
  Ie naray iamais
    I shall haue neuer
  Compaignie auecq vous
    Companye with you
  Tant come ie viue,
    As longe as I lyue,                           16
  Ou la vie ou corps auray.”
    Or the lyf in my body shall haue.”

  “+Brixe, va ou four,
    “+Bryce, go to the ouen
  Pour les pastees;
    For the pasteyes;
  Sacque hors lespaude
    Drawe out the sholdre                         20
  De lespoye tout chault,
    Of the spete all hoot,
  Car il est asses rostis,
    For it is ynough rosted,
  Et le drechies par escuelles.”
    And dresse it by disshes.”
  “Sire, les pastees sont venus;
    “Sire, the pasteyes be come;                  24
  Le rost est drechye.”
    The roste is dressyd.”
  Beatrix le lauendier
    Beatrice the lauendre
  Venra cy apres mengier;
    Shall come hether after diner;
  Se ly baillies les ligne draps;
    So gyue her the lynnen clothis.               28
  Elle les buera nettement.
    She shall wassh them clenly.
  “+Berte, escures les pots
    “+Berte, skowre the pottes
  Contre ces haulz iours
    Ayenst thise hye dayes
  En le chambre par tout.”
    In the chambre ouer all.”                     32


  ++COlard li orfeure
    ++COlard the goldsmyth
  Me doibt faire
    Oweth me to make
  Ma chainture,
    My gyrdle,
  Vne couroye clauwe
    A gyrdle nayled                               36
  dargent, pesant quarant deniers,
    With siluer, weyeng xl. pens,

[Sidenote: P. 30.]

  Et vng triaclier.
    And a triacle boxe.
  +Cyprien le tisseran
    +Cyprien the weuar
  Ma promys a tystre
    Hath promysed to weue                         40

[[32]]
[Headnote: NAMES: COLARD--CLEMENCE. _Kempster, Spinster, &c._]

  Mon drap
    My cloth
  Demain ou apres demain.
    To morow or after morow.
  “Quand y fu le file porte?”
    “Whan was the thred theder born?”
  “Hier, deuant hier.
    “Yesterday, tofore yesterday.                  4
  Anthan, deuant anthan,
    Foryere, tofor foryere,
  Ne leust on mye tissu
    Hit had not be wouen
  Pour autant come a iourdhuy,
    For as moche as on this day,
  Ne si hastiuement[1].”
    Ne so hastyly.”                                8

    [Footnote 1: hastinement]

  +Colard ly foulon
    +Colard the fuller
  Scet bien fouler drap.
    Can well fulle cloth.
  Si veul ie quil le foule;
    So wylle I that he fulle;
  Encore est il moult dangereux.
    Yet is he moche dangerous.                    12
  +Conrad li tondeurs
    +Conrade the sherman.
  Le doibt tondre;
    He oweth to shere;
  Il prende del aulne quatre mites
    He taketh of the elle foure mytes
  Puis que les tondeurs
    Syth that the sheremen                        16
  Eurent leur franchise.
    Hadde theyr franchise.
  +Katherine la pigneresse
    +Katherin the kempster
  Fu cy a{ur}ain pour argent.
    Was hiere right now for moneye.
  Elle iura par sa foye
    She swore by her faith                        20
  Quelle ne pigna oncques
    That she kembyth neuer
  Laine si bien;
    Wulle so well;
  Pour ce lui payera on bien.
    Therfor men shall paye her well.
  +Cecile la fyleresse
    +Cecyle the spinster                          24
  Vint auecques elle.
    Cam with her.
  Elle prise moult vostre fylet
    She preyseth moche your yarn
  Qui fu filee a le keneule;
    That was sponne on the dystaf;
  Mais le fil
    But the yarne                                 28
  Quon fila au rouwet
    That was sponne on the whele
  A tant de neuds
    Hath so many cnoppes
  Que cest merueille a veoir.
    That it is meruaylle to see.
  +Colombe le boysteuse
    +Colombe the halting                          32
  Sen ala tenchant de cy,
    Wente her chydyng from hens,
  Pour ce que ie
    For this that I
  Le vouloye baysier;
    Wolde haue kyssed her;
  Neantmoins nauoye ie talent,
    Neuertheless I had no luste,                  36
  Et elle me mauldist,
    And she me cursyd,
  Et ie le remauldis.
    And I cursyd her agayn.
  +Clement & +Clemence son fillaistre
    +Clement & +Clemence his stepdoughter

[[33]]
[Headnote: NAMES: CLARE--DONAAS. _Cloth-hurler, Bridlemaker._]

[Sidenote: P. 31.]

  Tencierent ensamble;
    Chydden to gyder;
  Elle dist que oncques parastre
    She said that neuer stepfadre
  Ne marastre furent bons;
    Ne stepmodre were good;
  Elle luy reprouua quil[1] auoit trouue
    He repreuud her that he[2] had founden         4
  Luytant a vng valleton.
    Her wrastlying with a boye.

    [Footnote 1: ? Il ... qu’il l’]

    [Footnote 2: she]

  +Clare la aueugle
    +Clare the blynde
  Va pour son pain.
    Goth for her breed.
  Aulmosne y est bien employe,
    Almesse is there well bestowed,                8
  Car au temps quelle veoit
    For the tyme that she sawe
  Elle eust enuys demande;
    She had not gladly axed;
  Si que cest pite de elle.
    So that is pite of her.
  +Clarisse la esbourysse
    +Clarisse the nopster                         12
  Scet bien son mestier.
    Can well her craft.
  “Tresquand le a elle aprys
    “Syth whan hath she lerned it
  Draps esbourier?”
    Cloth for to noppe?”
  “Que demandes vous?
    “What axe ye?                                 16
  Elle eu fu berchie.
    She was ther with rocked.
  Elle a bien a faire
    She hath good to doo
  Quelle gaigne moult,
    That she wynne moche,
  Car elle est moult gloutee.”
    For she is moche lichorous.”                  20


  ++DAvid le lormier
    ++DAvid the bridelmaker
  Est ung bon ouurier
    Is a good werkman
  De faire selles,
    For to make sadles,
  Frains, & esperons,
    Bridles, and spores,                          24
  Et ce quil y affiert.
    And that thereto belongeth.
  +Denis le fourbisseur
    +Denis the fourbysshour
  A de moy vng espee
    Hath of me a swerd
  De tresbon taillant,
    Of right good cuttyng,                        28
  Vng couttel a pointe,
    A knyfe with a poynte,
  Vng espee,
    A swerde,
  Quil me doibt fourbier.
    Whiche me ought to furbysshe.
  +Damyan le armoyer
    +Damyan the armorer                           32
  Me vendra vnes plates,
    Shall selle me a plate,
  Vng bachinnet,
    A bacenet,
  Vng haubergon,
    An habergeon,
  Vng gorgiere,
    A gorgette,                                   36
  Gauns de fer.
    Gloues of yron.
  +Donace le pourpointier
    +Donaas the doblet maker
  A parfaicte mon pourpainte
    Hath performed my doublet
  Et mon paltocque.
    And my Jaquet.                                40


[[34]]
[Headnote: NAMES: EUSTACE--ERMENTIN. _Upholster, Painter, &c._]

  ++EVstaes le tailleur
    ++EVstace the taillour
  A tant de taillier,
    Hath so moche to cutte,

[Sidenote: P. 32.]

  Pour la bonne diligence
    For the good diligence
  Quil faict a peuple
    That he doth to the peple                      4
  De liurer leurs vestures
    To deliuere their clothes
  Au iour quil a promys.
    Atte day that he hath promysed.
  Pour ce il ne cesse
    Therfor he resteth not
  Nuyt ne iour;
    Nyght ne day;                                  8
  Et sy a plente de coustriers;
    And hath plente of sowers;
  Encore dont ne peult il
    Yet thenne he may not
  A grand paine liurer aux gens
    With grete payne deliuere the peple
  Ce quil leurs promet.
    That whiche he hath promysed hem.             12
  +Euraerd le vieswarier
    +Euerard the vpholster
  Scet bien estoupper
    Can well stoppe
  Vng mantel trauwet,
    A mantel hooled,
  Refouller, regratter,
    Full agayn, carde agayn,                      16
  Rescourer vne robe,
    Skowre agayn a goune,
  Et tous vieulx draps.
    And alle old cloth.
  +Elyas le pointurer
    +Elyas the paynter
  E[s]t remaysonnes et remues
    Is howsed agayn and remeuyd                   20
  De la ou il soloit demourer.
    Fro thens where was woned to duelle.
  Il y met si longement
    He tarieth so longe
  Mon drap a taindre
    My cloth to dye                               24
  Que iaray dommage de luy.
    That I shall haue harme of hym.
  De quel couleur le taindra il?
    Of what colour shall he dye it?
  De bresille, de galles,
    Of brasylle, of galles,
  Il destaindera tantost.
    He shall stayne it anon.                      28
  Je le feroye descorche,
    I shalle doo it with barke.
  +Estieuene le voirier
    +Steuen the glasyer
  Luy pria qui le fesist bien;
    Praid hym he wold do it wel;
  Se luy en merchies
    So thanke hym                                 32
  Quand vous le verres,
    Whan ye hym see,
  Car il affiert bien.
    For it behoueth well.
  +Ermentin gist malade;
    +Ermentin lieth seke;
  Parles tout bas.
    Speke all softe.                              36
  On portera son vrine
    Men shall bere his vrine
  Au maistre alfrant.
    To maistre alfranke.
  Regarde que lorynal
    See that the vrinall
  soit net et clere;
    Be clene and clere;                           40

[[35]]
[Headnote: NAMES: FRANCIS--FERRAUNT. _Draper, Wine-crier, Baker, &c._]

  Et sil est ort,
    And yf it be foull,
  Se le frotte dedens.
    So rubbe it within.
  Keuure ta soer; elle suera;
    Couer thi suster; she shall suete;
  Se luy vauldra moult.
    Hit shall auaille her moche.                   4
  Elle lui vient de paour:
    Hit cam to here of fere:
  Elle vey bateiller deux hommes,
    She saw two men fighten,

[Sidenote: P. 33.]

  Dont lun fu tues
    Of whom that one was slayn
  Et laultre quassies.
    And that othir hurte.                          8


  ++FRancoys le drappier
    ++F[R]Aunseys[1] the drapier

    [Footnote 1: Fanuseys]

  Est ung riche homme;
    Is a riche man;
  Cest bien employe;
    It is well bestowed;
  Il donne voulentiers pour dieu;
    He gyueth gladly for goddes sake;             12
  Il visette les deshaities,
    He visiteth them that be not hole,
  Les prisonniers,
    The prisoners,
  Si conseille les vesues
    Also counseilleth the wedowes
  Et les orphenins.
    And the orphans.                              16
  +Firmin le tauernier
    +Fremyn the tauerner
  A deux tonniaulx de moust.
    Hath two tonnes of muste.
  Il ma presente
    He hath profred me
  A croire se ien a faire.
    To borowe yf I haue to doo with hem.          20
  Enuoyes en querir;
    Sende to fecche them;
  Il passe legierment le gorge.
    Hit passeth lyghtly the throte.
  +Frederic le vin crieres
    +Frederik the wyn criar
  Dist quil vault bien
    Saith that it is well worth                   24
  Ce quon vende.
    That men selleth it for.
  Il a droyt quil le dist;
    He hath right that he it saith;
  Il enboyt grandz traits.
    He drynketh grete draughtes.
  +Fierin le boulengier
    +Fierin the baker                             28
  Vend blanc pain et brun.
    Selleth whit brede and broun.
  Il a sour son grenier gisant
    He hath vpon his garner lieng
  Cent quartiers de bled.
    An hondred quarters of corn.
  Il achate a temps et a heure,
    He byeth in tyme and at hour,                 32
  Si quil na point
    So that he hath not
  Du chier marchiet.
    Of the dere chepe.
  +Fourchier le cardewanner
    +Forcker the cordewanner
  Met plus de cuir a oeuure
    Put more lether to werke                      36
  Que trois aultres,
    Than thre othir,
  Sy bonne vente a il
    So good sale hath he
  Des solers et galoches.
    Of shoes and of galoches.
  +Ferrau[n]s le chausser
    +Ferraunt the hosyer                          40

[[36]]
[Headnote: NAMES: PHILIPOTE--GERVAIS. _Thief’s ear cut off, &c._]

  Fait chausses si mal taillies
    Maketh hosen so euyll shapen
  Et si mal cousues[1],
    And so euyll sewed,
  Que ie ne conseilleroye nulluy
    That I shall counseille noman
  Chauses a luy achatter.
    Hosyn of hym to bye.                           4

    [Footnote 1: consues]

  +Phelipote le tigneuse
    +Philipote the scallyd
  Embla a son maistre
    Stall fro her maister
  Vng forgierel
    A forcyer

[Sidenote: P. 34.]

  Ou il auoit dedens
    Where ther was therin                          8
  Biaucop dorfrois
    Many orfrayes
  Et de reubans de soye
    And rybans of silke
  Et de la fustane;
    And of fustain;
  Si quil le fist prendre
    So that he toke her                           12
  Et mettre en prison;
    And sette in prison;
  Puis eubt elle
    Syth had she
  Loreille copee;
    Her ere cutte of;
  Si quelle menacha
    So that she thretened                         16
  Son maistre a faire tuer.
    Her maister to be slayn.
  Quoy quel en aduiegne,
    What so euer come therof,
  Chescun garde sa loiaulte!
    Eueriche kepe his trowthe!
  +Felix le ouurier de soye
    +Felice the silkewoman                        20
  Fait tant de bourses
    maketh so many purses
  Et aloyeres de soye;
    And pauteners of silke;
  Car elle en est maistresse.
    For she is therof a maistresse.


  ++GVillebert le arcenier
    ++GVysebert the bowemaker                     24
  Fait les arcs et les sagettes;
    Maketh the bowes & the arowes;
  Les arblastriers trayent.
    The arblastrers shote.
  +Gerard le moulenier,
    +Gherard the myllar,
  Selon ce quon dist,
    After that men saye,                          28
  Emble le moytie
    Steleth the half
  Du bled ou de farine[2]
    Of corn or of mele
  De ceulx qui luy
    Of them that to hym
  Apportent a mieuldre.
    Brynge to grynde.                             32

    [Footnote 2: farme]

  La moytie ne emble il mye,
    The half he steleth not,
  Mais vng peu de chescun sac.
    But a lytyll of euery sack.


  ++Geruas le escripuain
    ++Geruays the scriuener
  Scet bien escripre chartres,
    Can well write chartres,                      36
  Preuileges, instrumens,
    Preuyleges, instrumentis,
  Debtes, receptes,
    Dettes, receyttes,
  Testamens, copies.
    Testamentis, copies.
  Il scet bien compter
    He can well rekene                            40

[[37]]
[Headnote: NAMES: GOMBERT--GUY. _Writing, the Noblest Craft, &c._]

  Et rendre comptes
    And yelde rekenynges
  De toutes rentes,
    Of all rentes,
  Soit de rentes a vye,
    Be they of rente for lyf,
  Ou rentes herytables,
    Or rent heritable,                             4
  De toutes censes.
    Of all fermes.
  Il est bien prouffitables
    He is well proufitable
  En vng bon seruice;
    In a good seruise;
  Ce quil escript
    That whiche he writeth                         8
  Demeure celee.
    Abydeth secrete.

[Sidenote: P. 35.]

  Cest la plus noble mestier
    Hit is the most noble craft
  Qui soit au monde;
    That is in the world;
  Car il nest si hault
    For ther is none so hye                       12
  Ne si noble
    Ne so noble
  Qui se ahontier peult
    That may hym shame
  De le aprendre ne de le faire.
    For to lerne ne for to doo.
  Se nest lescripture
    Yf it were not the scripture                  16
  La loy & foy periroyent,
    The law and faith shold perisshe,
  Et toute la saincte escripture
    And all the holy scripture
  Ne seroit mise en oubly.
    Shall not be put in forgeting.
  Pour ce chescun loial xpristien
    Therfore euery true cristen man               20
  Le doibt faire aprendere
    Ought for to do lerne
  A ses enfans et parens;
    To his children and frendes;

    [Footnote: [? aprendre]]

  Et le doibuent meismes scavoir,
    And them selfe owe it to knowe,
  Ou aultrement, sans faulte,
    Or othirwyse, withoute faulte,                24
  Dieu leurs demandera
    God shall demande them
  Et en prendera vengance;
    And shall take of vengeaunce;
  Car ignourance
    For ignorance
  Pas ne les excusera.
    Shall nothyng excuse hem.                     28
  Chescun si acquite
    Euery man so acquite hym
  Comme il vouldra respondre!
    As he wylle ansuere!
  +Gombers le bouchiere
    +Gombert the bocher
  Demeure dencoste le boucerie.
    Duelleth beside the bocherie.                 32
  Il vent si bien ses chars
    He selleth so well his flessh
  Que luy appiert;
    That to hym it appereth;
  Car luy voy si poure
    For I sawe hym so poure
  Quil ne scauoit[1]
    That he knewe not                             36
  Que bouter en sa bouche.
    What to put in his mouth.

    [Footnote 1: scanoit]

  Pour ce est bonne chose
    Therfore it is good thyng
  Scauoir vng bon mestier.
    To conne a good craft.
  +Guyd le poissonner
    +Guy the fysshmonger                          40

[[38]]
[Headnote: NAMES: GABRIEL--GEORGE. _Linen-weaver, Bookseller, &c._]

  Ne sest mye pis portes,
    Hath not werse borne hym,
  Si quil appert aual sa maison.
    So as it apperith after his hous.
  Il vend toutes manieres
    He selleth all maners
  De poissons de mer
    Of see fysshe                                  4
  Et de doulce eauwe
    And of fressh water
  Lesquels sont escripts
    The whiche ben wreton
  Dessus en aulcun lieu
    To fore in som place
  Dedens ce liure.
    Within this book.                              8
  +Gabriel le tillier
    +Gabriel the lynweuar
  Tist ma toille
    Weueth my lynnencloth
  De fil de lin
    Of threde of flaxe

[Sidenote: P. 36.]

  Et destoupes.
    And of touwe.                                 12
  Si me fault de le traisme
    Me lacketh woef
  Et de lestam.
    And of warpe.
  Est elle acheuee?
    Is it ended?
  Oyl, des ioefdy
    Ye, sith thursday                             16
  Elle est tissue
    Hit is wouen
  Pour fair blancher.
    For to doo white.
  +Ghyselins le corbillier
    +Ghyselin the mande maker
  A vendu ses vans,
    Hath sold his vannes,                         20
  Ses corbilles,
    His mandes or corffes,
  Ses tammis.
    His temmesis to clense with.
  +Gherlin le chaudrelier
    +Gheryn the ketelmaker
  A este a bonne feest;
    Hath ben at a good fayre;                     24
  Il a lassie
    He hath there lefte
  Grand plente de batteries[1];
    Grete plente of baterye;

    [Footnote 1: barteries]

  Lesquelles denrees
    The whiche penyworthis
  Ie ne nommeray point,
    I shall not name,                             28
  Car ils sont nommees
    For they be named
  En vng des chapitres.
    In one of the chapitres.
  +George le librarier
    +George the booke sellar
  A plus des liures
    Hath moo bookes                               32
  Que tout ceulx de lauile.
    Than all they of the toune.
  Il les achate touts
    He byeth them all
  Tels quils soient,
    Suche as they ben,
  Soient embles ou enprintees,
    Be they stolen or enprinted,                  36
  Ou aultrement pourchacies.
    Or othirwyse pourchaced.
  Il a doctrinaulx, catons,
    He hath doctrinals, catons,
  Heures de nostre dame,
    Oures of our lady,
  Donats, pars, accidens,
    Donettis, partis, accidents,                  40

[[39]]
[Headnote: NAMES: GERVAS--LAMBERT. _Smith, Painter, Usurer, &c._]

  Psaultiers bien enluminees,
    Sawters well enlumined,
  Loyes a fremauls dargent,
    Bounden with claspes of siluer,
  Liures de medicines,
    Bookes of physike,
  Sept psalmes, kalendiers,
    Seuen salmes, kalenders,                       4
  Encre et parcemyn,
    Ynke and perchemyn,
  Pennes de signes,
    Pennes of swannes,
  Pennes dauwes,
    Pennes of ghees,
  Bons breuiares,
    Good portoses,                                 8
  Qui valent bon argent.
    Which ben worth good money.
  +Gervas le feure
    +Geruays the smyth
  Est biaucop plus rices.
    Is moche richer.
  Encore dont prest il
    Neuertheles leneth he                         12
  La liure pour trois mailles.
    The pound for thre halfpens.

[Sidenote: P. 37.]

  +Gertrude la soeur +Gillebert
    +Gertrude the suster of +Gylbert
  Est morte et trespassee;
    Is deed and passed;
  Prijez pour son ame.
    Praye for her soule.                          16
  Quand trespassa elle?
    Whan passed she?
  Droit maintenant.
    Right now.
  Dieu luy pardonne
    God forgyue her
  Ses pechies et ses meffais.
    Her synnes and her trespaces.                 20
  Nous yrons au corps
    We shall goo to the corps
  Demain a loffrande.
    To morn to thoffrynge.


  ++HEnry le pointurier
    ++HErry the paynter
  Point mon escu
    Paynteth my shelde                            24
  De diuerses couleurs.
    With diuerse colours.
  A grand rayson
    By grete reson
  Ie me loe de luy.
    I am plesid with hym.


  ++IEhan le vsurier
    ++IOhan the usurer                            28
  A tant preste
    Hath lente so moche
  Quil ne scet le nombre
    That he knoweth not the nombre
  Del auoir quil a
    Of the good that he hath
  tout maisement assemble.
    Alle euyll gadred to gedyr.                   32
  Il preste la liure
    He leneth the pounde
  Pour quatre deniers.
    For four pens.


  ++Kylian et ses compaignons,
    ++Kylian and his felaws,
  Pour leurs merites,
    For their deseruynges,                        36
  Sont saincts en paradys,
    Ben sayntes in paradyse,
  Ou est joye sans fin.
    Where is ioye withoute ende.


  ++LAmbert le charpentier
    ++LAmbert the carpenter
  A marchandet a moy
    Hath bargayned with me                        40

[[40]]
[Headnote: NAMES: LAURENCE--LUCIAN. _Mason, Brewer, Tiler, &c._]

  De faire mon chastel,
    To make my castell,
  Le basse court et vne grange,
    The nether court and a berne,
  Et le doibt charpenter
    And he oughteth to tymbre it
  De bon ouurage;
    Of good werke;                                 4
  Et les degretz,
    And the steyres,
  Tous[1] les boys charpentifs,
    Alle the tymbre woode,
  Doibt il liurer mesmes.
    He is bound to deliuer hym selfe.

    [Footnote 1: Tons]

  +Laurence le machon
    +Laurence the masone                           8
  A pris a machonner,
    Hath take to masone,
  Et amenra des ouuriers,
    And shal brynge the werkmen,
  Et sont achattes
    And ben bought
  Bonnes pieres de marbre;
    Good stones of marble;                        12
  Les fenestres dalbastre;
    The wyndowes of alabastre;
  Mais le caulx
    But the lyme or chalke
  Nest encore point mesure.
    Is not yet moten.

[Sidenote: P. 38.]

  +Lieuin le brasseur
    +Lyeuyn the brewar                            16
  Brasse tant de ceruoyse
    Breweth so moche ale
  Quil ne peult vendre;
    That he may not selle it;
  Car il est renommees
    For he is renomed
  De mauuais beuurage;
    Of euyll drynke;                              20
  Se luy conuient a le fois
    So hym behoueth othirwhyle
  Ietter deuant les porciaux.
    To cast to fore the hogges.
  +Lamfroy le couureur de tieulles
    +Lamfroy the couerar of tyles
  Couury le belfroy
    Couerd the steple                             24
  Descailles, de tieulles,
    With skaylles, with tyles,
  A mieulx quil pouoit;
    The beste wyse that he may;
  Encordont esty
    Neuertheles is it
  Par le vent descouuert.
    By the wynde discouerid.                      28
  +Leonard le couureur destrain
    +Lenard the thaccher
  Couury ma maysoncelle
    Hath couerd my litell hous
  Destrain et de gluy.
    With straw and with reed.
  Les lattes quil achatta
    The latthes that he bought                    32
  Ne valent riens.
    Be nothyng worth.
  Il fist les parois,
    He made the wallis,
  Et les placqua de terre,
    And daubed them with erthe,
  Dont est il placqueur.
    Wherof he was dawber.                         36
  +Logier le feultier
    +Logier the feltmaker
  A maint bon chappeau
    Hath many a good hatte
  De beures et de feultre.
    Of beuer and of felte.
  +Lucien le gantiers
    +Lucian the glouer                            40

[[41]]
[Headnote: NAMES: LYON--MAXIMIAN. _Purser, Grocer, Surgeon, &c._]

  Siet dencoste moy;
    Sitteth besyde me;
  Faitte gans de cierf,
    Maketh gloues of an herte,
  De chien et de brebis.
    Of hound and of sheep.
  +Lyon le bourssier
    +Lyon the pursser                              4
  A boursses et aloyeres,
    Hath pursses and pauteners,
  Et les achattent les enfans;
    And them bye the chyldren;
  Des tasses bien ouuries.
    Of the powches well wrought.
  +Lucie le bastarde
    +Lucie the bastarde                            8
  Ne fera iamais bien;
    Shall neuer doo well;
  Car elle dist mal de ceulx[1]
    For she saith euyll of them
  Qui bien lui ont fait.
    That well haue don to her.

    [Footnote 1: cenlx]


  ++MArtin le especier
    ++MArtin the grocer                           12
  Vent pluiseurs especes
    Selleth many spyces
  De toutes manieres de pouldre
    Of all maners of poudre
  Pour faire les brouets,
    For to make browettys,
  Et a moult de boistes pointes
    And hath many boxes paynted                   16
  Plaines de confections,
    Full of confections,

[Sidenote: P. 39.]

  Et moult de cannes
    And many pottes
  Plaines de beuurages.
    Full of drynkes.
  +Maurisse le surgien
    +Morysse the surgyan                          20
  Se mesle de guarir
    Medleth hym to hele
  Playes, claux,
    Woundes, soores,
  Et apostumes,
    And apostomes,
  De vnguements
    With oynementis                               24
  Et demplastres;
    And with plastres;
  Il scet taillier de la pierre,
    He can cutte out the stone,
  Et guarir par beuurages
    And hele by drynkes
  De grauelle, de rompture.
    Of the grauelle and of brekynge.              28
  +Maximian le maistre de medicines
    +Maximian the maistre of phisike
  Regarde le vrine des gens;
    Seeth the vrin of the peple;
  Il leurs scet a dire
    He can say to them
  De quoy ils sont mallade:
    Wherof they be seke:                          32
  Du mal du chief;
    Of the heed ache;
  Des doleurs des yeux,
    Of the payne of the eyen,
  Des oreilles;
    Of the eres;
  Sil ont[2] mal es dens,
    Yf they haue toth ache,                       36
  Aux pys, as mamelles;
    Atte the breste, at the pappes;

    [Footnote 2: out]

  Il scet guarir et curer
    He can hele and cure
  Ydropison, menison,
    Dropesye, blody flyxe,
  Tesyque, mormal,
    Tesyke, mormale,                              40

[[42]]
[Headnote: NAMES: MABEL--OBEROL. _Tailoress, Mustard-maker, &c._]

  Pieds, vngles,
    Feet, nayles,
  Fieures quartaines et tiercaines,
    Fever quartayn and tercian,
  De le gaunisse
    Of the Jaundyse[5]
  (Dont dieu nous garde),
    (Wherof god kepe vs),                          4
  Et de tout ce
    And of all that
  Que greuer nous pourroit.
    That may greue us.

    [Footnote 5: Janudyse]

  Il dont conseil a artetique
    He gyueth conseill for the goute
  Et daultres languers;
    And for othir seknesses;                       8
  Il a moult de bonnes herbes.
    He hath many good herbes.
  +Mabile le cousturiere[1]
    +Mabyll the shepster
  Se chauist tres bien;
    Cheuissheth her right well;

    [Footnote 1: consturiere]

  Elle fait sourplis,
    She maketh surplys,                           12
  Chemyses, brayes,
    Shertes, breches,
  Courechiefs, et tout ce
    Keuerchifs, and all that
  Que on peult ouurer
    That may be wrought
  De ligne drap.
    Of lynnen cloth.                              16
  +Mahault le huuetier
    +Maulde the huue or calle maker
  Se maintient sagement;
    Maynteneth her wisely;
  Elle vend chier ses huues;
    She selleth dere her calles or huues;

[Sidenote: P. 40.]

  Elles les keut[2] de deux coustures[3].
    She soweth them with two semes.               20

    [Footnote 2: kent]

    [Footnote 3: constures]


  ++NYchole le mostardier
    ++NYcholas the mustardmaker
  A bon vinaigre,
    Hath good vynegre,
  Bon verius, bon moustarde,
    Good veriuse, good mustarde,
  Galentine sausse,
    Galentyne sawce,                              24
  Noir poiure,
    Black pepre,
  Bonne gansailliede[4].
    Good ganselyn[6].

    [Footnote 4: gausailliede]

    [Footnote 6: gauselyn]

  +Natalie la dame des estuues
    +Natalye the wyf of the stewes
  Tient bonne estuue,
    Kepeth a good styewe,                         28
  La plus souffisante de la cite;
    The moste suffysaunte of the cite;
  Ilz y vont estuuer
    They goon thedyr to be stewed
  Toutes les estrangiers.
    Alle the strangers.
  Elle demeure
    She duelleth                                  32
  Deriere le mur des carmes.
    After the walle of the white freris.


  ++OLiuier le couretier
    ++OLyuer the brocour
  Gaigne a couretage,
    Wynneth by brocorage,
  A vng denier a dieu,
    With one goddes peny,                         36
  Vingt liures ou trente.
    Twenty pound or thyrty.
  +Oberol le hostelier
    +Oberol the hosteler
  A touts les bons hostes;
    Hath all the good ghestes;
  Il a les allemains
    He hath the alemayns                          40

[[43]]
[Headnote: NAMES: ONNOUR--OGIER. _Inn-Guests, Prison-keeper, &c._]

  Quon appelle oesterlins,
    That men calle esterlyngis,
  Poyteuins, fransoys,
    Poyteuyns, frenshemen,
  Engloys, brabansois,
    Englishmen, brabanders,
  Flamengs, lombars,
    Flemyngis, lombardis,                          4
  Espaignoys, Portingalois,
    Spaynardys, portingalers,
  Geneuoys, escochoys,
    Ienewys, scottes,
  Haynewiers, hollandois,
    Heynewiers, hollanders,
  Danoys, frisons.
    Danes men, of friseland.                       8


  ++Onnore le tourier
    ++Onnour the kepar of the tour
  Garde le prison
    Kepeth the prison
  La les prisonniers sont;
    There the prisonners bee;
  Il y sont laronnes, mourdriers,
    There ben theues, murderers,                  12
  Faulx monnoyers, robbeurs,
    False money makers, robbers,
  Afourceurs de femmes,
    Rauisshers of wymmen,
  Coppeurs de boursses.
    Cuttars of purses.
  Les vng pend on;
    That one men hange;                           16
  Les aultres traynnon;
    The othir be drawen;
  Les aultres mettons sur roels;
    The othir ben sette on wheles;
  Ceux qui coppent boursses
    Them that cutte purses
  Coppe on les oreylles.
    Cutte men the eres of.                        20
  Bussyn a a nom
    Bussin is named

[Sidenote: P. 41.]

  Ly bouriaulx de bruges.
    The hangman of bruges.
  Puis que malefaicteurs
    After that the euyll doers
  ount gehy leurs meffais,
    Haue knowlechid her euyll dedes,              24
  Les a il a mestrijer;
    He hath them to mastrye;
  Dieu nous garde
    God kepe vs
  De sa meistrise!
    Fro his maystrye!
  Baillius, escoutetes[1],
    Bayllyes, scoutes,                            28

    [Footnote 1: estoutetes]

  Aulcuns des escheuins,
    Somme of the skepyns,
  Cheuaucent auecq,
    Ryde with,
  La on les met a mort,
    There as they be put to deth,
  Et les sergeans ysont ainsy;
    And the sergeants ben there also;             32
  Ceulx qui eschappent
    They that escape
  Seront banny hors du pays
    Shall be banysshed out of the londe
  Sur pain dy estre penduz.
    Vpon payne to be hanged.
  +Ogier le fauconner
    +Ogier the fauconer                           36
  Aporta des faucons,
    Brought faucons,
  Oystoires dardane,
    Gerfaucons of ardane,
  Espreuiers,
    Spere haukes,
  Quil vendra a montpellier.
    That he shall sell at monpeller.              40

[[44]]
[Headnote: NAMES: OGIER--QUERYNE. _Woolbeater, Cooper, &c._]

  +Ogier le poulaillier
    +Ogier the pulter
  A des poules asses,
    Hath polettes ynowhe,
  Quils ne sont trop cras
    Which ben not ouer fatte
  Ne trop magre.
    ne ouer lene.                                  4


  ++Pyere le bateure de laine
    ++PEter the betar of wulle
  Va tout oyseux,
    Gooth alle ydle,
  Car son doyen
    For his dene
  Lui a deffendu son mestier
    Hath forboden hym his craft                    8
  Sour lamende de vingt solz,
    Vpon thamendes of xx. shelyngs,
  Jusques a dont[1] quil aura[2]
    Till that he shall haue
  Achatte sa franchise.
    Bought his franchyse.

    [Footnote 1: dout]

    [Footnote 2: anra]

  Il sen plaindra
    He shall complaine hym                        12
  Au burchmaistre,
    Unto bourghmaistre,
  Et les gardiens des mestiers
    And the wardeyns of the crafte
  Nen font compte.
    sette not therby.
  +Poul le cuuelier
    +Poule the couper                             16
  Faict et refaict les cuues,
    Maketh and formaketh the keupis,
  tonniaulx, vaissiaux
    Barellis, vessellis
  Courans et gouttans.
    Lekyng and droppyng.
  +Paulin le mesureur de bled
    +Paulyn the metar of corne                    20
  A tant mesure
    Hath so moche moten
  De bled et de mestelon
    Of corne and of mestelyn
  Quil ne peult plus de viellesse;
    That he may no more for age;

[Sidenote: P. 42.]

  Il est tout gryse.
    He is alle graye.                             24
  Il donna a chescun sa mesure.
    He gyueth to euerich his mesure.
  +Pieronne sa filleule
    +Pieryne his doughter
  Est la pieure garce
    Is the shrewest ghyrle
  Que ie sache de cha la mere.
    That I knowe on this side the see.            28


  ++QUintin le tollenier
    ++QVyntyne the tollar
  A pris de moy
    Hath taken of me
  Vng liure de gros
    A pound of grotes
  Plus quil ne debuoit prendre
    More than he ought to take                    32
  Du droit[3] tonlieu;
    Of right tolle.

    [Footnote 3: troit]

  Sy me trayeray
    So shall I drawe me
  Au recepueur
    Vnto the receyuour
  Pour men droit requerre.
    For my right to requyre.                      36
  +Quirin le detier
    +Queryne the dysemaker
  Vendt ses dees
    Selleth his dyse
  Ainsi qui veult a prest argent;
    As he wyll for redy money;
  Cest bonne marchandise.
    Hit is good marchandyse.                      40


[[45]]
[Headnote: NAMES: ROBERT--RANDOLF. _Carrier, Handworker, &c._]

  ++RObert le messagier
    ++RObert the messager
  Est enuoyes au roy,
    Is sent to the kynge
  A tout deux paires de lettres
    With two paire of lettres
  Sellees du seal royal.
    Sealed with the kynges seal.                   4
  +Roberte la cerenceresse
    +Roberte the heklester
  Na plus de channeue,
    Hath no more hempe,
  Et a perdu sa cerench;
    And hath lost her hekell;
  Elle vendra son lin.
    She shall selle her flaxe.                     8
  +Richaert le veytier
    +Rychard the carier
  (+Richier le chareton)
    (+Richer the cartar)
  Menra du fien sur ma terre
    Shall lede dong on my land
  Quand elle sera ahanne,
    Whan it shall be ered,                        12
  Et sur mon courtil
    And on my herber
  Quand il sera fouys,
    Whan it shall be doluen,
  Et au gardin
    And in to the orchard
  Entour les arbres.
    Aboute the trees.                             16
  +Rolland le mainouurier
    +Rolande the handwerker
  Fera mon prayel,
    Shall make my pryelle,
  Vne soif entour.
    An hegge aboute.
  +Rogier le coustre
    +Roger the sextayn                            20
  Est a auignon,
    Is at auinion,
  Pour empetrer
    For to gete
  Vne cure, vne chapelrie;
    A cure, a fre chapell;
  Voire se dieu plaist.
    Ye truly, yf god wyll.                        24
  +Rainier le esquier
    +Reyner the squyer

[Sidenote: P. 43.]

  Est aus Joustes,
    Is atte Justes,
  Aux tournoys, acompaignie
    At the tornoye, acompanyed
  Tres honnourablement;
    Right worshipfully;                           28
  Il a mon rouchin,
    He hath my coursour,
  Mon palefroy, mon destrier,
    My palfreye, my stede,
  Mes lances.
    My speres.
  Il aura le pris.
    He shall haue the prys.                       32
  +Raulle le changier
    +Randolf the changer
  A sys a change trente ans.
    Hath seten in the change xxx. yere.
  Les monnoyes sont bien desirees,
    The moneyes ben well desired,
  Si que les gens se mettent en peril
    So that folke put hem in peryll               36
  Destre dampnes.
    To be dampned.
  Cest grand folye
    It is grete folye
  De donner le eternalite
    For to gyue the eternalite
  Pour le temporalite.
    For the temporalte.                           40


[[46]]
[Headnote: NAMES: WALTER--YSAAC. _Brushmaker, Currier, &c._]

  ++WAultier le paternostrier
    ++Walter the paternoster maker
  Vend a le dedicasse
    Solde at the dedicacion
  Paternosters de cristal,
    Bedes of cristall,
  Par dousaines en gros,
    By doseyns in grete,                           4
  Dambre, de voire, et de cornes.
    Of ambre, of glas, and of hornes.
  +Willame le rammonier
    +William the brusshemaker
  Vendt les rammons par loysir.
    Selleth the brusshes by leyzer.
  Ce poise moy; ie vouldroye
    Wo is me; I wolde                              8
  Quil le vendisist bien.
    That he solde well.
  +Valerien le tenneur
    +Valeryen the tawyer
  A moult dauantage
    Hath moche auantage
  En ce quil vend cuyr,
    In that that he selleth lether,               12
  Car il le tanne meisme.
    For he taweth hymselfe.
  +Walram le coureur
    +Walram the coryer
  Faict vng ort mestier.
    Dooth a foul crafte.
  Il pute aual la maison;
    He stynketh after the hous;                   16
  Il coure ses piaulx
    He coryeth his hydes
  De saing de herencs.
    With sayme of heryngs.
  +Vaast le vairrier
    +Vedast the graywerker
  Vendi orains a madame
    Solde whiler to my lady                       20
  Vne pelice de vaire
    A pylche of graye
  Et de bonnes fourrures.
    And of good furres.
  +Wauburge le pelletiere
    +Wauburge the pilchemaker[1]
  Refaicte vng plice bien;
    Formaketh a pylche well;                      24
  Aussi faict son baron.
    So doth her husbonde.

    [Footnote 1: piclh-]


  ++Xpristien le gorlier
    ++Xpristrian the colermaker
  Me faict ung goriel;
    Maketh to me a coler;

[Sidenote: P. 44.]

  Dont aray deux goriaulx
    Than shal I haue two coliers                  28
  Pour mes cheuaulx de querue.
    For my horses of the plowh.
  +Xpristiene la fylle
    +Xpristine the doughter
  Se plaint du serrurier,
    Complayned her of the lokyer,
  Pour ce quil nye
    By cause that he denyeth                      32
  Dun enfant quil gaigna.
    Of a child that he wan.


  ++YZores le hugiers
    ++Ysores the Joynar
  Fist le forcier de mamye,
    Made a forcer for my loue,
  Sa luysel, son escrijn.
    Her cheste, hir scryne[2].                    36

    [Footnote 2: scyrne]

  +Ysaac le vigneron
    +Ysaac the wyneman
  Yra as vignes.
    Shall to the vyneyerd.
  Il me souhaidera des crappes;
    He shall weeshe me of the grapes;
  Car en les vignes
    For in the vyneyerd                           40

[[47]]
[Headnote: NAMES: _Kettlemaker, Proctor, &c._ GOD IS MERCIFUL.]

  Gaignera il asses.
    He shall wyn[n]e ynowh.
  +Ysaac le chauderlier
    +Ysaac the ketelmaker
  Donne quatre chaudrons,
    Gyueth four ketellis,
  Contenant douze galons chescun,
    Conteynyng twelue galons euerich,              4
  Pour quarant gros le piece.
    For fourty grotes the pece.
  Et le bon chandelliere
    And the good candelmaker
  Donne quatre chandeylles de sieu[1]
    Gyueth foure talow candellis
  Pour vng denier le piece.
    For one peny the pece.                         8

    [Footnote 1: sleu]


  ++ZAchare le procureur
    ++ZAchare the proctour
  Mapporte vne sommonce;
    Hath brought me a sommonce;
  Car iay faicte sommondre
    For I haue to do somone
  +Ierome le barbier;
    +Iherome the barbour;                         12
  Ie playderay encontre luy.
    I shall plete ayenst hym.
  +Iosse le parceminier
    +Iosse the parchemyn maker
  Me vendi vne piel parcemyn
    Solde me a skyn of parchemyn
  Qui tout flua,
    That alle flued,                              16
  Et vne couuerture de franchin
    And a coueryng of franchyn
  Rees a vng les,
    Shauen on the one syde,
  Qui riens ne valoit,
    Whiche nought was worth,
  Que ie ny puis sus escripre.
    That I myght not write vpon.                  20
  Va querre vne ponce[2]
    Goo fecche a pomyce
  Et du meillour papier,
    And of the best papier,
  Mon caniuet, mes forcettes.
    My penknyf, my sheris.

    [Footnote 2: pouce]

  Iescripray vne lettre damours;
    I shall write a lettre of loue,               24
  Se lenuoyeray a mamye.
    And shall sende it to my loue.




[Sidenote: [CH. IX.]]

  ++Je suy tout lasses
    ++I am alle wery
  De tant de noms nommer
    Of so many names to name
  De tant de mestiers,
    Of so many craftes,                           28
  Tant doffices, tant deseruices;
    So many offices, so many seruises;

[Sidenote: P. 45.]

  Je me veul reposer.
    I wyll reste me.


  ++Encore dont, pour ralongier
    ++Neuertheless, for to lengthe
  Ce que iay comenciet,
    That whiche I haue begonne,                   32
  Diray ie du meilleur:
    I shall saye the beste:
  Cest que dieu nous crea
    That is, that god hath made vs
  A la samblance
    Vnto the lykenes
  De luy mesmes.
    Of hym selfe.                                 36
  Je dy au commencement,
    I saye atte begynnyng,
  Qui bien fera bien aura.
    Who doth well shall well haue.
  Dieu est misericors,
    God is mercyfull,
  Et si est iuste;
    And so he is rightfull;                       40

[[48]]
[Headnote: SERVE OUR LORD AND THE SAINTS.]

  Il a mercy des pecheurs
    He hath mercy of the synnars
  Qui cognoistre se veullent;
    Which hem selfe wyll knowe;
  De ceulx qui ont repentance,
    Of them that haue repentaunce,
  Qui fasse vraye confession,
    Which make verry confession,                   4
  Et leur penance parfacent
    And theyr penaunce fuldoo
  Que le confesseur leurs charge.
    That the confessour them charge.
  Et le faulx mauuais,
    And the false euyll,
  Que damender nont cure,
    That to amende them recche not,                8
  Selon la saincte escripture,
    After the holy scripture,
  Sont en auenture de perir.
    Ben in aduenture to perysshe.
  Pour ce est il mal aduises
    Therfore he is euyll aduised
  Qui nauret le[1] sent
    That wounded hym selfe feleth                 12
  En peril de mort,
    In peryll of deth,

    [Footnote 1: ? se]

  Sil ne prend remede
    Yf he take not remedye
  Quand il le scet ou trouuer.
    Whan he knoweth wher to fynde.
  On dist qui sert nostre seigneur,
    Men saye who serueth our lord, 16
  Et la vierge marie,
    And the mayde marye,
  Les sains apostles,
    The holy apostles,
  Les[2] quatre euangelistes,
    The foure euangelistes,

    [Footnote 2: Le]

  Angeles et archangeles,
    Angelis and archangelis,                      20
  Prophetes et martirs,
    Prophetes and martris,
  Patriarces, confesseurs,
    Patriarkis, confessours,
  Sainttes viergenes,
    Holy virgynes,
  Sainctes vesues,
    Holy wedowes,                                 24
  Saints innocens--
    Holy innocentes--
  Ces saints et sainctes--
    These saynctes--
  Il attend bon loijer
    He attendeth good reward
  Enuers dieu par leurs priers.
    Anenst god by theyr prayers.                  28
  On doibt oyr messe
    Men ought to here masse
  Et touttes les heures du iour;
    And all the houres of the day;
  Qui en est aysies au moins.
    Whiche is at his ease atte leste.

[Sidenote: P. 46.]

  Aller veoir le sacrament
    Goo see the sacrament                         32
  Est vng bon desiunement.
    Is a good brekefast.
  Se vous debues
    Yf ye owe
  Aucunes pelerinages,
    Ony pylgremages,
  Si les payes hastiuement.
    So paye them hastely.                         36
  Quand vous estes meus
    Whan ye be meuyd
  Pour aller vostre voyage,
    For to goo your viage,
  Et vous ne scaues le chemin,
    And ye knowe not the waye,
  Si le demandes ainssi[3],
    So axe it thus,                               40

    [Footnote 3: amssi]

[[49]]
[Headnote: TRAVEL TALK. LODGING FOR HORSE AND MAN.]

  En commandant les gens a dieu:
    In comandyng the peple to god:
  ‘A dieu, bonnes gens;
    ‘To god, goode peple;
  Ie men voie a sainct Jaques,
    I goo to saynt James,
  A nostre dame de boulogne.
    To our lady of boloyne.                        4
  A la quelle porte ysseray ie,
    At whiche gate shall I goo out,
  Et a quelle main
    And at whiche hande
  Prenderay ie mon chemyn?’”
    Shall I take my way?’”
  A le main dextre,
    On the right hande,                            8
  Quand vous venres a vng pont,
    Whan ye come to a brigge,
  Si les passes;
    So goo ther over;
  Vous trouueres vne voyette
    Ye shall fynde a lytill waye
  A le main senestre,
    On the lyfte honde,                           12
  Qui vous menra en vne contre
    Whiche shall brynge you in a contre
  La vous verres sur vne eglise
    There shall ye see vpon a chirche
  Deux haultes clocquiers;
    Two hye steples;
  De la aurez vous
    Fro thens shall ye haue                       16
  Que quatre lieuwes
    But four myle
  Iusques a vostre gyste.
    Vnto your loggyng.
  La seres vous bien aisies
    There shall ye be well easyd
  Pour vostre argent,
    For your money,                               20
  Et se y aures bon hostel.
    And ye shall haue a good Jnne.
  “Dame, dieu y soit!”
    “Dame, god be here!”
  “Compain, vous soies bien venus.”
    “Felaw, ye be welcome.”
  “Poroye ie auoir
    “May I haue                                   24
  Ung licte chyens?
    A bedde here withinne?
  Pourray ie cy herbegier?”
    May I here be logged?”
  “Oyl, bien et nettement,
    “Ye, well and clenly,
  Si fussies vous dousisme[1],
    Alle were ye twelue,                          28
  tout a cheual.”
    Alle on horseback.”

    [Footnote 1: donsisme]

  “Nennil,[2] fors que nous trois.
    “Nay, but we thre.
  A il a mengier chy ens?”
    Is there to ete here within?”

    [Footnote 2: Nenuil]

  “Oyl, asses, dieu mercy.”
    “Ye, ynough, god be thanked.”                 32
  “Apportes nous ent.
    “Brynge it to vs.

[Sidenote: P. 47.]

  Donnes du fain as cheuaulx,
    Gyue heye to the hors,
  Et les estraines bien;
    And strawe them well;
  Mais quils soient abuures.”
    But that they be watred.”                     36
  “Dame que debuons nous?
    “Dame what owe we?
  Nous avons este bien aise.
    We have ben well easyd.
  Nous compterons demain,
    We shall rekene to morow,
  Et payerons aussi,
    And shall paye also, 40

[[50]]
[Headnote: AT THE INN. A NUMBER-BOOK TO BE WRITTEN.]

  Que vous vous en loeres.
    That ye shall hold you plesid.
  Menes nous couchier;
    Brynge vs to slepe;
  Nous sommes lasses.”
    We ben wery.”
  “Bien, ie voye, vous reposeres.
    “Well, I goo, ye shall reste.                  4
  Iannette, alumes le chandeille;
    Ienette, lyghte the candell;
  Si les menes la sus
    And lede them ther aboue
  Ou soler deuant;
    In the solere tofore;
  Si leur porte de liauwe chaude
    And bere them hoot watre                       8
  pour lauer leurs pieds;
    For to wasshe their feet;
  Si les couure de coussins.
    And couere them with quysshons.
  Regarde que lestable
    Se that the stable
  Soit bien fremme.”
    Be well shette.”                              12

    [Footnote: [? ferme]]

  “Dame, peult on nauyer
    “Dame, may men goo by ship
  Descy a bouloigne?”
    Fro hens to boloyne?”
  “Oyl, maintenant il ya
    “Ye, now ther is
  Vne nef preste plaine de gens.
    A shippe redy ful of peple.                   16
  Dieu les veulle conduire!
    God well them conduyte!
  Dieu les amaine a sauuete!
    God brynge them in sauete!
  Dieu les laisse leur voye
    God late them theyr waye
  Bien employer!
    Well fulcome!                                 20
  Escoutes! il tonne et esclire;
    Herke! it thondreth and lyghtneth;
  Y pluyt et gresille;
    It rayneth and haylleth;
  Dieu saulue les biens des champs!”
    God saue the goodes of the feldes!”
  “Dieu en puist souuenir.”
    “God may them bythynke.”                      24
  Seigneurs, qui vouldroit,
    Lordes, who wolde,
  Ce liure ne fineroit iamais,
    This boke shold neuer be ended,
  Car on ne pourroit tant escripre
    For men may not so moche write
  Quon ne trouueroit toudis plus:
    Me shold fynde alway more:                    28
  Le parchemin est debonnaire;
    The parchemen is so meke;
  Il seuffre sour luy escripre
    Hit suffreth on hit to write
  Quancques on veult.
    What someuer men wylle.




[Sidenote: [CH. X.]]

  ++CY appres vous deuiseray
    ++HEre after I shall deuyse you               32
  Vng liuret quon appelle
    A litell book that men call
  Le nombre, le quel est
    The nombre, the which is
  Moult prouffytable,
    Moche prouffytable[1],

    [Footnote 1: pronffytable]

[Sidenote: P. 48.]

  Par le quel
    By the whiche                                 36
  On pourra scauoir compter
    Men shall mowe conne rekene
  De denier as deniers;
    Fro peny[2] to pens;

    [Footnote 2: peuy]

  Si en poes retenir
    So may ye reteyne
  Les debtes quon vous doibt,
    The dettes that men owe you, 40

[[51]]
[Headnote: NUMBERS AND COINS. THE EPILOGUE.]

  Et les receptes
    And the receyttes
  Que vous aues rechupt
    That ye haue receyuyd
  Ou que vous aues paiet.
    Or that ye haue payd.
  Si commencies ainsi
    So begynne all thus                            4
  Comme est declare cy apres:
    As is declared hereafter:


  ++UNg, deux, trois,
    ++ONe, tweyne, thre,
  Quatre, chincq, six,
    Foure, fyue, sixe,
  Sept, huyt, neuf, dix,
    Seuen, eight, nyne, ten,                       8
  Onze, douze, treze,
    Enleuen, twelue, thirtene,
  Quatourze, quinze, seze,
    Fourtene, fiftene, sixtene,
  Dixsept, dixhuyt,
    Seuentene, eyghtene,
  Dixneuf, vingt,
    Nynetene, twenty,                             12
  Trente, quarante,
    Thretty, fourty,
  Chincquante, soixante,
    Fyfty, Syxty,
  Septante, huytante,
    Seuenty, eyghty,
  Ou quatre vingt,
    Or four score,                                16
  Nonante, Cent,
    Nynty, hondred,
  Deux cents,
    Two hondred,
  Mille, Cent mille,
    A thousand, a hondred thousand,
  Vng million;
    A myllyon;                                    20
  Ainsi toudis montant.
    Thus alleway mountyng.
  +Vne liure de strelins,
    +A pound sterlings,
  Vne marcq que vault
    A marcke that is worth
  Deux nobles[1] dangleter,
    Two nobles of englonde,                       24

    [Footnote 1: uobles]

  Vne liure de gros,
    A pound grete,
  Monoye de flaundres,
    Moneye of flaundres,
  Vne soulde que vault
    A shellyng that is worth
  Trois gros ou douze deniers,
    Thre grotis or twelue pens,                   28
  Vne gros vault quatre deniers,
    A grote is worth four pens,
  Vng denier, vne maille,
    A peny, a halfpeny,
  Vng quadrant, vne mite.
    A ferdyng, a myte.


  ++CY fine ceste doctrine,
    ++HEre endeth this doctrine,                  32
  A westmestre les loundres
    At westmestre, by london,
  En formes impressee,
    In fourmes enprinted,
  En le quelle vng chescun
    In the whiche one euerich
  Pourra briefment aprendre
    May shortly lerne                             36
  Fransois et engloys.
    Frenssh and englissh.

[Sidenote: P. 49.]

  La grace de sainct esperit
    The grace of the holy ghoost
  Veul enluminer les cures
    Wylle enlyghte the hertes

[[52]]
[Headnote: A CONCLUDING PRAYER.]

  De ceulx qui le aprendront,
    Of them that shall lerne it,
  Et nous doinst perseuerance
    And vs gyue perseueraunce
  En bonnes operacions,
    In good werkes,
  Et apres cest[1] vie transitorie
    And after lyf[2] transitorie                   4
  La pardurable ioye & glorie!
    The euerlastyng ioye and glorie!

    [Footnote 1: ceste, Blades ii. 133.]

    [Footnote 2: this lyf, Blades ii. 133.]




LIST OF ENGLISH WORDS


  +accidents+, books of accidence, 38/40.
  +aduenture+:
    _in a._, likely, in danger, 48/10.
  +after+ (rendering Flemish _achter_, Fr. _aval_), throughout,
      38/2, 46/16.
  +Alemayne+, +Almayne+, Germany, 14/17, 22/27.
  +Alemaynes+, Germans, 42/40.
  +all+, used as adverb, 31/7;
    +alle+, with subj., even if, 49/28;
    +all halowes+, the feast of All Saints, 28/18.
  +alleway+, always, 9/23.
  +almesse+, alms, 33/8.
  +alouses+, shad, 12/7.
  +alume+, alum, 1/26, 20/35.
  +amendes+, penalty, fine, 44/9.
  +Andwerp+, Antwerp, 18/37.
  +andyrons+, andirons, 8/8.
  +anenst+, towards, in the sight of, 48/28.
  +angre+, refl., be angry, 31/6.
  +anone+, immediately, 25/26.
  +apostomes+, imposthumes, abscesses, 41/23.
  +apotecarie+, apothecary, 19/34.
  +appereth+, apperith, 37/34, 38/2.
  +arblastrer+, crossbowman, 36/26.
  +Ardane+, Ardennes, 43/38.
  +atte+, at the, 34/6, 45/26.
  +auantage+, advantage, 46/11.
  +auaunte+, refl., boast, 30/14.
  +auctour+, author, 3/33.
  +Austyns+, Augustine friars, 24/5.
  +Auynyon+, +Auinion+, Avignon, 22/20, 45/21.
  +axe+, ask, 21/16, 33/16, 48/40;
    +axed+, 15/36, 33/10.
  +ayenst+, against, 31/31, 47/13.

  +bacenet+, bassinet, helmet, 33/34.
  +bales+, balls (of alum), 20/36.
  +banerett+, knight banneret, 24/33;
    _double banerette_, 24/36.
  +bankers+, coverings for benches, 7/1.
  +barke+, bark (used in dyeing), 34/29.
  +ba[r]terye+, pots and pans, 38/26.
  +basenne+, sheep leather, 19/26.
  +bastard+, a wine, 14/7.
  +baylly+, bailiff, 30/10.
  +be+, = been, 32/6.
  +Beane+, Beaune, 14/5.
  +becke+:
    _drink b. to b._, drink together (Fr. _bec à bec_).
  +bedes+, beads, 46/3.
  +Beghyns+, Beguines, 24/11.
  +beldame+, mother-in-law, 6/2.
  +belfadre+, father-in-law, 6/2.
  +Beme+, Bohemia, 22/38.
  +ben+, are, 4/31, 13/17.
  +benes+, beans, 13/39.
  +Benet+ (seynt), St. Benedict, 24/2.
  +bere+, bear (animal), 11/21.
  +bergayne+, bargain for, 14/28.
  +berne+, barn, 40/2.
  +Berow+, Bergues, 19/2, 24/31.
  +betes+, beetroot, 13/32.
  +beuer+, beaver (for hats), 40/39;
    +beuers+, beavers (animals), 9/1.
  +bileue+, believe;
    _I you b. well_, 15/26.
  +blyew+, blue, 14/36.
  +bocher+, butcher, 37/31;
    +bochiers+, 2/31.  [[error for 2/21]]
  +bocherie+, meat-market, 37/32.
  +bocle+, buckle, 21/28.
  +boden+, bid, offered, 15/35.
  +Boloyne+, Boulogne, 49/4, 50/14.
  +boor+, boar, 10/26.
  +bordclothes+, table cloths, 8/24.
  +born+, carried, 32/3.
  +boulye+, a drink, 14/19.
  +bourghmaistre+, burgomaster, 44/13.
  +Bousser+ (= Fr. _Bourshier_), _vycounte of B._, 24/30.
  +brasyll+, brazil wood, 20/18, 34/27.
  +brede+, breadth, 16/23.
  +brede+, bread, 26/39.
  +brekynge+, rupture, hernia, 41/28.
  +brembles+, brambles;
    +bremble beries+ (Fr. _grouselles_, gooseberries), 13/23.
  +bremes+, bream, 12/7.
  +brenne+, burn, 30/26.
  +briches+, breeches, 8/37.
  +bridelmakers+, 1/16.  [[error for 2/16]]
  +brigge+, bridge, 49/9.
  +brocorage+, brokerage, 42/35.
  +brocour+, broker, 42/34;
    +brokers+, 2/30.
  +broun peper+, black pepper, 10/28;
    +broun sugre+, 20/1.
  +browet+, stew, broth, 10/20;
    +browettys+, 41/15.
  +broythures+, embroideries, 22/5.
  +bueff+, beef, 10/14.
  +bukke+, buck, 19/23.
  +Burgoyne+, Burgundy, 24/19.
  +butores+, bitterns, 10/40.
  +buxom+, polite, 9/39.
  +by cause that+, because, 46/32.
  +byleding+, translation of Fr. _deduit_, delight, 29/12.
  +byre+, beer, 14/17.
  +bystowe+, lay out (money), 20/20.
  +bythynke+, remember, think upon, 50/24.

  +calle+, headdress, 42/18.  [[error for 42/17]]
  +callyng+, invocation (of the Trinity), 1/5.
  +Camerik+, Cambray, 23/19.
  +cammelle+, ? for _cannelle_, cinnamon, 20/2.
  +can+, knows, is skilled in, 33/13;
    see +conne+.
  +cannes+, cans (tin), 7/17;
    earthen pots, 7/10.
  +carier+, wagoner, 45/9.
  +castelayn+, castellan (of Dover), 24/29.
  +castell+, cattle, 40/1.
  +catell+, money, 15/12;
    +catayllys+, chattels, furniture, 1/8.
  +Cathon+, Dionysius Cato, 9/27;
    +catons+, copies of Cato’s ‘Disticha,’ 38/38.
  +caudell+, caudle, 14/1.
  +Cecile+, Sicily, 22/36.
  +certainly+, definitely, 16/1.
  +chalon+, ? blanket, coverlet (but used to render F. _calys_,
      apparently ‘couch’), 7/2.
  +change+, exchange office, 45/34.
  +changer+, money-changer, 45/33;
    +chaungers+, 45/33.  [[error for 2/33]]
  +chanons+, canons, 23/30.
  +chapell+, chapel:
    _a fre ch._, 45/23.
  +chapitre+, chapter, 14/4.  [[error for 15/4]]
  +chappelains+, chaplains, 24/7.
  +charge+:
    _haue no c. of_, don’t care for, 31/4.
  +Chartre hous+:
    _monkes of C._, Carthusians, 24/4.
  +chekens+, chickens, 10/32.
  +chepe+, bargain for, 10/24.
  +chertes+, shirts, 8/37.
  +cheruyll+, chervil, 13/32.
  +cheuissheth her+, is successful, 42/11.
  +chirche haliday+, church feast, fair, 19/7.
  +chorle+, peasant, 30/8.
  +Cistiauls+, Citeaux, 23/37.
  +clarey+, a spiced wine, 14/12.
  +clergesses+, members of female religious orders, 24/11.
  +cnoppes+, lumps (in yarn), 32/30.
  +cobelers+, cobblers, 2/28.
  +coddelynges+, codfish, 12/3.
  +coffyns+, caskets, 21/33.
  +coler+, collar (for horses), 46/27;
    +coliers+, 46/28.
  +colermaker+, (horse)collar maker, 46/26.
  +Coleyne+, Cologne, 23/8.
  +commaunde+, commend, 5/21, 6/12.
  +complyn+, late evening service, 27/30.
  +comyn+, common, 1/17.
  +comyne+, cummin, 19/40.
  +conduyte+, guide, 5/24.
  +confyte+, comfrey (see the Notes), 13/19.
  +congres+, conger-eels, 12/8.
  +conne+, know, be skilled in, 37/39;
    see +can+.
  +contre+, country, 5/2.
  +conyes+, rabbits, 9/2.
  +cool+, cabbage, 13/30.
  +cordewan+, Cordovan leather, 19/24.
  +cordewanner+, shoemaker, 35/35.
  +corffes+, baskets, 38/21.
  +corse+, girdle, 21/27.
  +coryer+, currier, 46/14;
    +coriars+, 1/25.
  +coryeth+, curries, 46/17.
  +cosen alyed+, cousin by marriage, 29/13.
  +cosyns germayns+, cousins german, 6/5.
  +couerar of tyles+, tiler, 40/23.
  +couercles+, lids, 7/35, 7/40.  [[7/40 unidentified error]]
  +couerlettes+, coverlets, 6/40.
  +couper+, cooper, 44/6;  [[error for 44/16]]
    +coupers+, 2/31.
  +coursour+, courser, 45/29.
  +courtosye+, courtesy, 18/16.
  +courtoys+, courteous, 5/12.
  +coyfes for men+, coifs, 21/38.
  +crafte+, trade, 46/15;
    +craftes+, 25/23.
  +creuyches+, crayfish, 12/15.
  +cristall+ (for beads), 46/3.
  +crosse+:
    _neuer a c._, not a farthing, 15/40.
  +cubibes+, cubebs, 19/39.
  +curattes+, curates, 24/7.
  +cure+, church benefice, 45/23.

  +dame+, lady, 4/33, 15/5, 49/22.
  +damoyselle+, +damyselle+, young lady, 4/19, 4/30, 5/29, 15/39.
  +dampned+, damned, 45/37.
  +Danes men+, Danes, 43/7.  [[error for 43/8]]
  +dangerous+, hard to manage, cross-tempered, 32/12.
  +daubed+, plastered, 40/35.
  +dawber+, plasterer, 40/36.
  +dedicace+, parish festival, 46/2.
  +dene+, dean (of a trade guild), 44/7.
  +dere chepe+, high buying prices, 35/34.
  +deuyse+, explain, 14/27.
  +dight+, prepare (food), 10/28.
  +discouered+, uncovered, 40/28.
  +do+, = done, 47/11;
    see +doo+.
  +doctrinals+, copies of the _Doctrinale_ (a grammar), 38/38.
  +dokes+, ducks, 12/32.
  +doluen+, dug, 45/14.
  +donettis+, copies of Donatus’s grammar, 38/40.
  +dong+, dung, 45/11.
  +doo+, as a causative auxiliary, 26/5, 37/21;  [[error for 26/25]]
    +doo of+, doff, put off, 4/18, 4/20;
    +do on+, don, put on, 25/39.
  +Dornyk+, Tournay, 18/30.
  +doseyns+, dozens, 46/4.
  +doughter+,
    mistranslation of _fille_, prostitute, 46/30;
    of _filleule_, god-daughter, 44/26.
  +dresse+, serve up (food), 31/23;
    _d. to ete_, prepare a meal, 26/38.
  +dyerye+, dyer’s business, 20/37.
  +dyse+, dice, 44/38;
    +dysemaker+, 44/37.
  +dystaf+, distaff, 32/27.

  +elle+, ell, 15/15, 32/15;
    +thelle+, the ell, 15/8.
  +Elzeter+, Alsace, 14/4.
  +eme+, uncle, 6/3.
  +en+, redundant negative (a Flemicism), 18/18.
  +enfourme+, instruct, 9/33.
  +enke hornes+, inkhorns, 21/35.
  +enleuen+, eleven, 51/9.
  +enlumined+, illuminated (of a manuscript), 39/1.
  +enlyghte+, enlighten, 51/39.
  +enprinted+, printed, 38/36, 51/34.
  +entremete+, refl., undertake, 20/40.
  +entreprise+, undertake, 3/38.
  +er+, before, 26/2.
  +ered+, ploughed, 45/12.
  +erst+, first, before doing something else, 27/8.
  +Esterlynges+, Easterlings, 43/1.
  +estre+, Easter, 28/13.
  +eternalite+, what is eternal, 45/39.
  +eueryche+, +euerich+, everybody, 2/39, 31/1;
    _one euerich_, 51/35.
  +euyll+, bad (in quality), 40/20;
    _e. auenture_, ill luck, 29/10.
  +euyll+, badly, 11/12.
  +eyrekakis+, egg cakes, ? omelets, 13/1.

  +failled+:
    _ye f._, you wanted (anything), 18/4.
  +fair syre+, my good sir, 18/3.
  +falle+, occur, be met with, 25/11.
  +fatte+, vat, cask, 26/19.
  +fauconers+, falconers, 43/36.
  +faucons+, falcons, 43/37.
  +faulte+:
    _without f._, without fail, 37/14.  [[error for 37/24]]
  +fayres+, fairs, 1/19.
  +felaw+, +felawe+, as a polite term of address, 4/34, 49/23;
    [[error for 4/35]]
    _my felaws_, my companions, 18/23.
  +felawship+, society, companionship, 31/5.
  +feldeseed+, ‘field seed,’ 20/10.
  +fellis+, skins, 19/23.
  +ferdyng+, farthing, 51/31.
  +ferme+, rent, annual payment, 37/5.
  +festes+, festivals, 28/3.  [[error for 28/7]]
  +feuerer+, February, 27/39.
  +fichews+, polecats, 11/18.
  +flawnes+, flawns, 12/34.
  +flesh+, meat, 37/33.
  +flesshshamels+, shambles, 10/8.
  +flued+, made the ink run, 47/16.
  +folke+, people, folks, 9/40;
    _f. of ordre_, members of religious orders, 2/5.
  +folye+, folly, 45/38.
  +for+:
    _for to_, = to (with infinitive), 2/40, 4/5;
    _for this that_, because, 32/34.
  +forbere+, bear with, defer to, 9/25.
  +forcer+, +forcyer+, +forcier+, chest with a lock, 8/20, 36/7, 46/35.
    [[error for 8/21]]
  +forgeten+, forgotten, 13/2.
  +formaketh+, repairs, mends, 44/17, 46/24.
  +foryere+, last year, 32/5.
  +fourbysshour+, furbisher, 33/26.
  +fourmes+, (printers’) forms, 51/34.
  +franchise+, freedom (of a trade guild), 32/17.
  +franchyn+, a sort of parchment, 47/17.
  +frere+, friar:
    _freres menours_, Minorites, Franciscans, 24/3;
    _lewd freris_, lay brothers, Beghards, 24/6.
  +fro+, from, 4/1.
  +frockes+, = Fr. _sourcorps_, 8/30.
  +fulcome+, accomplish (a journey), 50/20.
  +fuldoo+, perform, 48/5.
  +furmenty+, furmety, 13/40.

  +galentyne+, sauce, 42/24.
  +galles+, gall-nuts, 34/27.
  +galoches+, overshoes, 35/39.
  +ganselyn+, a garlic sauce, 42/26.
  +garettis+, garrets, 6/28.
  +Garnade+, ? Granada:
    _wyn of G._, 14/8.
  +Gaunt+, Ghent, 18/28.  [[error for 18/29]]
  +geloffres+, cloves, 13/35.
  +gerfaucons+, gerfalcons, 43/38.
  +germayns+:
    see +cosyns germayns+.
  +Germole+:
    _wyn of G._, 14/5.
  +ghees+, geese, 12/31.
  +gheet+, goats, 12/30, 19/23 (but ghotes, 11/24);  [[error for 11/22]]
    used as singular, 10/23.
  +ghestes+, guests, 42/39.
  +ghyrle+, girl, 44/27.
  +gloues of yron+, gauntlets, 33/37.
  +God+, in salutations, &c.:
    _G. you kepe_, 4/24;
    _G. give you good daye_, 4/32;
    _G. reward you_, 5/14;
    _G. late me deserue it_, 5/15;
    _G. you haue in his holy kepyng_, 5/26;
    _goo to god_ (= adieu), 6/13.
  +Goddes peny+, broker’s commission, 42/36.
  +gogeorns+, gudgeons, 12/16.
  +good chepe+, cheap, 15/11.
  +goodlynes+, pleasant manners, 18/17.  [[error for 18/15]]
  +gorelmakers+, horsecollar makers, 2/37.
  +gorgette+, armour for the neck, 33/36.
  +gramercy+, many thanks, 5/11, 18/11.
  +graye+, vair, fur, 46/21.
  +grayne+, grain:
    _scarlet in g._, 15/1;
    _graynes of paradys_, 20/3.
  +graywerker+, furrier, 46/19.
  +grene of Spayne+, 20/17.
  +grene sauce+ (eaten with pork), 10/11.  [[error for 10/13]]
  +grete+, great:
    _in g._, wholesale, 46/4.
  +greue+, (of food) disagree with, 11/6.
  +greywerke+, furriery, 2/36.
  +grote+, groat, coin, 51/29;
    +grotes+, +grotis+, 17/21, 44/31, 51/28.
  +growell+, gruel, 14/2.
  +guldrens+, guilders, gulden, 17/31.
  +gyuing oute+, expenditure, 3/9.

  +habergeon+, 33/35,
  +haddoks+, haddocks, 12/3.
  +halting+, lame, 32/32.
  +handwerker+, farm labourer, 45/17.
  +happe+, luck, fortune, 29/22.
  +hardy+, bold, brave, 24/32.
  +haue right+ (= _avez droit_), 15/20.
  +hawgher+, heifer, 10/20.  [[error for 10/19]]
  +heberow+, lodging, 5/31.
  +heeryng+, +heryng+, herring, 12/8, 12/9.
  +hegge+, hedge, 45/19.
  +hekell+, heckle, 45/7.
  +heklester+, (female) heckler, 45/5.
  +hem+, them, themselves, 45/36.
  +Henaud+, Hainault, 24/28.
  +herber+, garden, 45/13.
  +herte+, hart, 10/27, 41/2.
  +herthe+, hearth, 8/6.
  +hether+, hither, 31/27.
  +heth hennes+, moor hens, 11/1.
  +hewke+, a sort of cloak, 16/18;
    +heukes+, 8/31, mantle.
  +heye+, hay, 13/27.
  +Heynewiers+, people of Hainault, 43/7.
  +hiere+, here, 29/23, 24.
  +hit+, it, 6/27, 9/21, 25/37, &c.
  +holde+:
    _holde you companye_, accompany you, 26/5.
  +hole+, whole, 15/7;
    in good health, 35/13.
  +honde+, hand;
    _take on h._, undertake, 3/38.
  +hooled+, holed, torn, 34/15.
  +hosteler+, innkeeper, 42/38;
    +hosteliers+, 2/30.
  +hound+, dog (skin), 41/3.
  +houres+, hours (of divine service), 48/30;
    see +oures+.
  +howsed+, provided with a house, 34/20.
  +huues+, caps, 21/37, 42/19.
  +hye dayes+, festival days, 31/31.
  +hyndecalf+, fawn, 10/27.

  +Janiver+, January, 27/39.
  +jaquet+, jacket, 33/40.
  +Jenewys+, Genoese, 43/6.
  +in longe tyme+, for a long time, 5/1.
  +joustynges+, tiltings, 25/2.
  +joynar+, joiner, 46/34;
    +joyners+, 2/37.
  +justes+, tiltings, 45/26.
  +Juyll+, July, 28/2.
  +Juyn+, June, 27/1.  [[error for 28/1]]

  +kalenders+, calendars, 39/4.
  +kawdrons+, cauldrons, 7/6.
  +kembyth+, combs (wool), 32/21.
  +kempster+, female woolcomber, 32/18;
    +kempsters+, 2/15.
  +kersses+, creases, 13/36.  [[error for 13/35]]
  +ketelmaker+, kettle-maker, 47/2;
    +ketelmakers+, 2/23.
  +keuerchief+ (see the Notes), 8/36;
    +keuerchifs+, kerchiefs, 43/14.  [[error for 42/14]]
  +keupis+, tubs, barrels, 44/17.
  +kien+, +kyen+, cows, 12/29, 19/21.
  +knowlechid+, confessed, 43/24.
  +kreme+, cream, 12/38.

  +laces+, latchets, ties, 21/40.
  +langyng+, belonging, 1/8.
  +lastes+, lasts (weight), 21/13.
  +late+, let, 27/12.
  +lauendre+, laundress, 31/26.
  +lauours+, wash-hand basins, 7/8.
  +lede+, lead, cart (dung), 45/11.
  +leed+, lead (metal), 21/22.
  +lelyes+, lilies, 13/20.
  +leneth+, lends, 39/12, 33.
  +lengthe+, lengthen, 57/31.  [[error for 47/31]]
  +lese+, lose, 15/39.
  +letews+, lettuce, 13/34.
  +leuain+, leaven, 14/20.
  +leue+, leave:
    _take l._, 5/22.
  +leue+, make an abatement, 16/3.
  +leuer+, rather, 15/37.
  +leuyng+, leaving;
    used to translate _relief_ (_de la table_), 9/7.
  +lewd freris+, lay brothers, Beghards, 24/6.
  +leyzer+, leisure;
    _by l._, in a leisurely way (i.e. finding little custom), 46/20.
    [[error for 46/7]]
  +librariers+, booksellers, 2/23.
  +lichorous+, dainty, fond of good living, 33/20.
  +loches+, loach, 12/16.
  +loftes+, upper rooms, 6/28.
  +lokyer+, locksmith, 46/32;  [[error for 46/31]]
    +lokyers+, 2/36.
  +longhe+, lung, 26/28.
  +Luke+, Liege, 23/18.
  +luses+, luces, pike (fish), 12/12.  [[error for 12/13]]
  +luste+, desire, 32/36.
  +lyef+, ladylove, 29/14.
  +lyfte honde+, left hand, 48/12.  [[error for 49/12]]
  +lynweuar+, linen weaver, 38/9;
    +lynweuers+, 2/22.
  +lystes+ (translation of _lesons_, settees), 7/5.

  +maistre+, prefix to the name of a physician, 34/38.
  +makerell+, mackerel, 12/6.
  +maluesey+, malmsey, 14/10.
  +mandemaker+, basket maker, 38/19;
    +maundemakers+, 2/24.
  +mandis+, baskets, 38/21.
  +maners+, sorts, kinds, 18/24, 19/36, 38/3.
  +marchans+, merchants, 21/17.
  +marcke+, mark (coin), 51/24.  [[error for 51/23]]
  +mareshall+, marshal (of France), 30/2.
  +maroners+, sailors, 11/39.
  +marte+, market, fair, 19/1.
  +Mase+, the Meuse, 12/18.
  +masone+, do mason’s work, 40/9.
  +mastrye+, +maystrye+, rule, 43/28;  [[error for 43/27]]
    _has them to mastrye_, has them in his power, 43/25.
  +matynes+, matins, 27/17.
  +mayde Marie+, the Virgin Mary, 48/17.
  +mayntene+, keep a stock of, 6/29.
  +me+, one (= Fr. _on_), 6/19, 8/12, 12/38, 14/22, 26/12, &c.
    [[error for 6/20 ... 26/16]]
  +mecop+, poppy;
    _oyle of m._, 20/11.
  +mede+, mead (drink), 14/15.
  +medle with+, deal in, 18/6.
  +medleyed+, mixed, 14/34.
  +medliers+, medlars, 13/7.
  +meesen+, tomtits, 10/37 (a Flemish word).
  +membres+, limbs, 27/4.
  +Mence+, Mayence, 23/10.
  +merceryes+, mercer’s goods, 1/28.
  +meruaylle+, marvel, 32/31.
  +meschief+, misfortune, 29/8.
  +messager+, messenger, 45/1;
    +messagiers+, 2/32.
  +mestelyn+, mixed corn, 44/22.
  +metar+, measurer, 16/34, 44/20;
    +metars+, 2/32.
  +mete+ (verb), measure, 16/29;
    +meten+, +moten+, measured, 26/25, 40/15, 44/21.
  +meuyd+, moved, disposed, 48/37.
  +meyne+, household, 5/35.
  +mo+, +moo+, more (as adv. and with a plural), 3/2, 3/34, 11/9, 30/21.
    [[error for 30/24]]
  +moche+, very, 26/6, 32/12, 50/35.
  +molettis+, mullets, fish, 12/6.
  +morberies+, mulberries, 13/6.
  +mormale+, gangrene, 41/40.
  +morreey+, murrey (colour), 14/38.
  +mortier+, mortar (kitchen utensil), 26/40.
  +mote+, may (in wishes), 4/38, 5/25.  [[error for 4/39]]
  +moten+:
    see +mete+.
  +mottes+, hillocks, mounds, 13/25.
  +mowe+, be able, 3/22, 11/7, 50/37.
  +muscadel+ (wine), 14/7.
  +mylnars+, millers, 2/21.
  +myntemakers+, coiners, 2/34.
  +myte+, half farthing, 51/31.

  +Nauerne+, Navarre, 22/37.
  +nayled+, studded with nails, 31/36.
  +naylle+, clove (wool weight), 19/13.
  +ne+, nor, 10/34, 20/5;  [[error for 21/5]]
    not, 19/20;
    redundant negative, 12/22, 20/4, 29/26.  [[error for 21/4]]
  +nether court+, farm yard, 40/2.
  +neueus+, nephews, 6/6.
  +nobles+, half-marks (6s. 8d.), 51/24;
    see +ryallis nobles+.
  +nokertree+, walnut tree, 13/14.
  +noppe+, to burl (cloth), 33/15.
  +nopster+, burler, 33/12.
  +notes+, nuts, 13/6.
  +nothyng+, not at all, 5/18.
  +noyeng+, annoyance, harm, 29/8.

  +officials+ (of the church), 2/4, 23/25.
  +of the+, +of+, = Fr. partitive article, 10/9, 41/7, 47/22.
  +olifaunts+, elephants, 11/19.
  +ooke+, oak, 13/3.  [[error for 13/13]]
  +orfrayes+, borders of gold lace, 36/8.  [[error for 36/9]]
  +Oseye+, Alsace;
    _wyn of O._, 14/8.
  +Ostryche+, Austria, 24/20.
  +othirwhyle+, sometimes, 40/21.
  +ouermoche+, too much, 5/5.
  +oughteth+, ought, 40/3.
  +our lady in heruest+, the Assumption, Aug. 15, 28/23.
  +our lady in marche+, Lady-day, Mar. 25, 28/21.
  +oures+, books of hours, 38/39.
  +owe+, ought, 37/23;
    _oweth to_, is to (do something), 31/34.
  +oynementis+, ointments, 41/24.

  +paintours+, painters, 2/25.
  +paintures+, pigments, paints, 20/16.
  +palfreye+, 45/20.  [[error for 45/30]]
  +parchemyn+, +perchemyn+, parchment, 2/38, 39/5, 47/15.
  +pardon+, parish festival, 28/33.
  +parfourmed+, finished making, 33/39.
  +partie+, part, 21/2.
  +partis+, books on the parts of speech, 38/40.
  +partrichs+, partridges, 11/1.
  +pasteyes+, pies, 12/37.
  +pauntcher+, girdle to hold up the breeches, 8/35.  [[error for 8/38]]
  +pauteners+, +pawteners+, purses, 36/22, 41/5.
  +paynefull weke+, the Passion week, 28/28.
  +pece+:
    _the p._, apiece, 47/5.
  +pelowes+, pillows, 8/35.
  +pendants of silke+, ? ribbons worn as trimmings for dress, 21/39.
  +penners+, writing cases, 21/33.
  +pens+, pence, 3/8, 17/25, &c.;
    as a weight, 31/37.
  +penyworthes+, wares, 18/1.
  +perche+, pole to hang cloth on, 8/28.  [[error for 8/29]]
  +perchemyn+:
    see +parchemyn+.
  +peres+, pears, 13/4.
  +persely+, parsley, 13/32.
  +pesen+, peas, 13/39, 22/11.
  +pesibly+, peaceably, 9/17.  [[error for 9/18]]
  +pesshes+, peaches, 12/7.  [[error for 13/7]]
  +pestyll+, +pestel+, pestle, 8/28, 27/1.
  +pikerellis+ (fish), 12/13.
  +pikes+ (fish), 12/13.
  +pilchemaker+, pelisse maker, 14/23;  [[error for 46/23]]
    cf. +pylche+.
  +plackes+, placks (Scots copper coin), 17/23.
  +plaise+, +plese+, please:
    _if you plaise ony thyng_, 5/6;
    _yf it you plese you_, 15/16.
  +plate+, breastplate, 33/33.
  +platers+, platters, trays, 7/30.
  +playne+, refl., complain, 31/12.
  +plete+, go to law, 47/13.
  +pleyers+, minstrels, 2/35.
  +plouier+, plover, 10/35.
  +polettes+, pullets, fowls, 44/2;
    see +poullet+.
  +pomyce+, pumice-stone, 47/21.
  +Poole+, Poland, 22/39.
  +porreette+, leeks, 13/3.  [[error for 13/31]]
  +porselane+, purslain, 13/34.
  +Portingale+, Portugal, 23/2.
  +Portingalers+, Portuguese, 42/5.  [[error for 43/5]]
  +portoses+, breviaries, 39/8.
  +potages+, pot-herbs, 1/16;
    soups or stews, 20/32.
  +potterye+, crockery market, 7/13.
  +poullet+, pullet, 10/32;
    see +polettes+.
  +pourchaced+, obtained, 38/37.
  +poure+, poor, 37/35.
  +pourpays+, porpoises, 12/2.
  +powches+, pouches, 41/7.
  +poyntels+, pencils for ruling lines, 21/34.
  +poyntes+, tags for dress, 21/30.  [[error for 21/40]]
  +Poytevins+, men of Poitou, 43/5.  [[error for 43/2]]
  +preysith+, praises, 32/26.
  +printed cakes+, 12/36.
  +pris+, price, 26/20.
  +proctour+, proctor, 47/9.
  +prouostye+, provostship, 30/11.
  +pryelle+, meadow, close, 45/18.
  +prys+, prize, 45/32.
  +pulter+, poulterer, 44/1.
  +pultrie+, poultry market, 10/30.
  +pursser+, purse-maker, 41/4;
    +pursers+, 2/28.
  +pybakers+, pastry cooks, 2/34.
  +pylche+, pelisse, 46/21;
    +pylches+, 9/2;
    cf. +pilchemaker+.
  +pylle+ (verb), peel (garlic), 27/7.

  +quarte+ (measure: = stope), 7/27.  [[error for 7/23]]
  +qultes paynted+, counterpanes, 6/31.  [[error for 6/38]]
  +quysshons+, cushions, 50/10.

  +rapes+, turnips, 13/36.
  +raye+, striped cloth, 14/39.
  +Raynes+, Reims, 23/9.
  +recche+, reck, care, 27/35;
    used impersonally (_me reccheth_), 27/18.
  +receyuour+, receiver of taxes, 44/35.
  +recommaunde me to+, salute for me, 5/36.
  +recyte+, receipts, income, 3/9.
  +reed+, red, 22/1.
  +rekenynges+, accounts, 37/1.
  +remeuyd+, removed, 34/20.
  +renomed+, notorious, 40/19.
  +rente+, income, 37/3.
  +rented+, endowed with a stipend, 23/30.
  +repreuud+, reproved, 33/4.
  +respyte+, truce, 30/4.
  +rightfull+, just (said of God), 47/40.
  +roches+, roach, 12/15.
  +Roen+, Rouen, 23/9.
  +rogettis+, red mullet, 12/5.
  +Romeneye+, wine of Romanée, 14/10.
  +royames+, kingdoms, 29/37.
  +ryallis nobles+ (English coin), 17/33.
  +rynysshe+, +rynysh+, Rhenish (wine), 14/4;
    (guilders), 17/31.
  +Ryselle+, Lille, 18/31.

  +Sacrament+, day of, Corpus Christi day, 28/30.
  +sad blew+, dark blue, 14/38.
  +salewe+, salute, 4/23;
    +salewyng+, 4/27.
  +salews+, saluts (coin of Lyons), 17/34.
  +sallyers+, salt-cellars, 7/32.
  +samon+, salmon, 12/17.
  +sarges+, blankets, 6/37.
  +sauete+, safety, 50/18.
  +sauf your grace+, by your leave, 17/3, 28/36.
  +sauge+, sage, 13/33.
  +saussers+, sauce boats, 7/31.
  +sawters+, psalters, 39/1.
  +saye+, a kind of cloth, 14/40.
  +sayme of hereng+ (heryngs), lard, grease, 20/33, 46/18.
  +scallyd+, scabbed, 36/5.
  +scoutes+ (Flemish municipal officers), 43/28.
  +scryne+, casket, 46/36.
  +scutes+, écus, crowns, 17/32.
  +seeke+, +seke+, sick, 11/5, 14/1.
  +seethe+, boil, 30/23.
  +selers+, cellars, 6/30.
  +seten+, sat, 45/34.
  +seuen salmes+, books containing the seven penitential psalms, 39/1.
      [[error for 39/4]]
  +sextain+, sacristan, 45/20.
  +sextiers+ (measure of capacity), 1/8.  [[error for 21/8]]
  +shal wylle+, 3/37.
  +shame+ (refl.), to be ashamed, 37/14.
  +shelynges+, shillings, 3/8, 15/15.
  +shepster+, tailoress, 42/10;
    +shepsters+, 2/29.
  +shere+, shear (cloth), 32/14.
  +sheremen+, shearers (of cloth), 2/15.
  +sheres+, shears, scissors, 21/36.
  +shette+, shut, 50/12.
  +shold+, should (= would), 3/3.
  +shrewest+, worst-tempered, 44/27.
  +siewet+, suet (renders Fr. _sieu_, tallow), 20/30.
  +siluer+, = money, 18/12, 18/19.
  +skaylles+, ? flat tiles, 40/25.
  +skepyns+, Flemish aldermen, 43/29.
  +skowre+, scour, 31/30, 34/17.
  +so+, = O.Fr. _si_ (emphasizing a statement), 4/21.
  +soden+, boiled, 12/25;  [[error for 12/35]]
    _wyn s._, boiled wine, 14/11.
  +solas+, comfort, 29/7.
  +solere+, upper story, 50/7.
  +sommonce+, summons, 47/10.
  +somone+, summon, 47/11.
  +sooles+, solos (fish), 12/4.
  +sowers+, sewing-men, 34/9.
  +sowned+, rung (of a bell), 30/15.
  +sperehaukes+, sparrow-hawks, 43/39.
  +speres+, lances, 45/31.
  +spete+, spit (for roasting), 31/21.
  +spinster+, female spinner, 32/24;
    +spynsters+, 2/15.
  +sponne+, spun, 32/27.
  +spores+, spurs, 25/40.
  +spoylle+, 26/37 (see the Notes).
  +sprotte+, sprat, 12/5.
  +spycier+, grocer, 19/34;
    +spycers+, 2/29.
  +squyer+, squire, 45/25.
  +stall+, stole, 36/6.
  +stede+, steed, 45/30.
  +Sterbrigge+, Stourbridge (fair), near Cambridge, 19/3.
  +sterlyngis pens+, sterling pennies, 17/35;
    _a pound sterlings_, 51/22.
  +stewed+, heated with hot-air baths, 42/30.
  +stewes+:
    see +styewe+.
  +steyres+, stairs, 14/32.
  +stope+, quart measure, 7/18.
  +stoppe+, mend (clothes), 34/14.
  +stratch+, stretch, extend to, 3/26.
  +strawe+, give straw to (horses), 49/35.
  +suete+, sweet, 13/17, 35/3.
  +surcote+, overcoat, 14/16.  [[error for 16/16]]
  +suster+, sister, 6/8;
    +sustres+, 6/9.
  +swerde+, sword, 33/30.
  +syre+, +sire+, sir, 4/24, 5/4, 16/20.
  +syth+, +sith+, since, seeing that, 17/4, 7;
    then, 26/1;
    +syth ... sith+, first ... and then, 25/18;
    +syth that+, since, after, 32/16.
  +syther+, cider, 14/18.

  +taillour+, tailor, 34/1.
  +take on honde+, = take in hand, 3/38.
  +tapytes+, bed hangings, 6/37.
  +taryeng+, tarrying, 14/25.
  +tasses+, satchels, 21/32.
  +tauerner+, tavern-keeper, 35/17.
  +taweth+, tans, 46/13.
  +tawyer+, tanner, 46/10;
    +tawyers+, 2/25.  [[error for 2/35]]
  +telle+, count, 17/17.
  +temmesis+, sieves, 38/22.
  +temporalite+, temporal concerns, 45/40.
  +termes of the yere+, 2/12, 28/8.
  +Terrewyne+, Terouenne, 23/20.
  +tesyke+, phthisis, 41/40.
  +that one ... that other+, the one, the other, 35/7.
  +theder+, thither, 32/3.
  +thise+, these, 13/16, 22/4.
  +thornbake+, thornback (fish), 12/4.
  +thourgh+, through, 8/26.
  +thre kynges, day of+, Epiphany, 28/27.
  +tofor+, +tofore+, before, 32/4, 38/7.
  +togyder+, together, 33/1.
  +tollar+, toll collector, 44/29.
  +tonge+, pair of tongs, 8/9.
  +tornoye+, tourney, 45/27.
  +tour+, tower;
    _kepar of the t._, 43/9.
  +tournemens+, tournaments, 25/1.
  +tree+, wood, 7/34.
  +trenchours+, trenchers, 7/32.
  +treuet+, trivet, stand for a pot, 8/5.
  +Treyer+, Treves, 23/10.
  +triacle+, ‘treacle,’ antidote to poison, 11/31;
    +triacle boxe+, 31/39.  [[error for 31/38]]
  +triews+, truce, 29/38.
  +trippes+, tripe, 26/27.
  +tweyne+, two, 51/6.
  +tyerse+, tierce (canonical hour), 27/35.  [[error for 27/25]]
  +tylers+, tilers, 2/26.
  +tymbre+, do the woodwork of, 40/3.
  +tymbre wood+, wood for building, timber, 40/6.

  +valure+, rank, dignity, 4/17.
  +vannes+, winnowing baskets, ‘fans,’ 38/20.
  +verdures+, green herbs, 38/20.  [[correct line is 13/22]]
  +verry+, true, 48/4.
  +vessches+, vetches, 22/10.
  +viage+, journey, 48/38.
  +vnces+, ounces, 21/10.
  +vpholster+, old clothes man, 34/13;
    +vpholdsters+, 2/17.
  +vsuriers+, usurers, 2/25.
  +vylonye+, bad manners, rudeness, 29/1.

  +wafres+, wafers, milk cakes, 12/40.
  +wan+, begat, 46/33.
  +wardeyns+, wardens (of a guild), 44/14.
  +wastles+, cakes, 13/1.
  +waye+, wey (wool weight), 19/12.
  +weeshe+, wish, 46/39.
  +well+, will, 26/3.
  +wene+, think, 16/14;
    +wende+, thought, 11/10.
  +werres+, wars, 25/3.
  +weuar+, weaver, 31/39;
    +weuers+, 2/13.  [[error for 2/14]]
  +weue+, weave, 31/40.
  +weyeng+, weighing, 31/37.
  +wherof+:
    _if ye haue w._, if you can afford it, 7/14.
  +whiler+, a while ago, 46/20; = Flemish _wilen eer_.
  +whutche+, box, 8/20.
  +whyte mete+, butter, cheese, eggs, &c. 1/12, 12/33.
    [[error for 1/13, 12/23]]
  +wo is me+, I am sorry for it, 46/8.
  +wolde+:
    _ye w. saye_, you mean, 30/17;
    _I w._, I could wish, 46/8.
  +woned+, accustomed, 34/21.
  +wood+, woad, 20/38.
  +worshippe+, _vb._, reverence (parents), 9/24.
  +wortes+, potherbs, 14/2.
  +wote+, (I) know, 21/4.
  +wrastlyng+, wrestling, 33/5.
  +wreton+, written, 25/13.
  +wull+, wool, 1/20.
  +wullen+, woollen, 14/29.
  +wurte+ (renders F. _tercheul_, bran), 14/21.
  +Wyllemyns+, Guillelmin friars, 24/3.
  +wylough+, willow, 13/15.
  +wyndowed+:
    _well w._, 6/24.
  +wyn[n]e+, win, earn, 46/47.  [[error for 47/1]]
  +wyneman+, wine maker, 46/37.
  +wyte+, know, 18/12.

  +y-asured+, azure-tinted, 14/36.
  +ye+, yes, 30/21, 49/27.
  +yelde+, render (accounts), 37/1.
  +yeres minde+, anniversary, 25/32.
  +yeue+, give, 15/24 (but _gyue_, 16/14, &c.).  [[error for 16/4]]
  +ynche+, +ynke+, ink, 30/23, 39/5;
    see +enke hornes+.
  +youris+, yours, your family, 5/20.
  +ypocras+, a medicated wine, 14/12.
  +ysope+, hyssop, 13/33.




NAMES OF PEOPLE, PLACES, &c.

(_A few are also given in the List of English Words, pp._ 53-60. --F.)


  Abel, 26/12.
  Abraham, 25/37.
  Adryan, 26/16; 27/36.  [[error for 26/3]]
  Agace, 28/10, Agatha.  [[error for 28/11]]
  Agnes, 28/5.
  Alarde, 26/7.
  Albright, 29/28, Albert.
  Alemayne, 14/17; 22/27, Germany.
  Alfranke, 34/38, Lanfranc?
  All Hallows’ Day, 28/18.
  Aloste, 18/34.
  Alsace, 14/4, 8.
  Amand, 29/13.
  Amelbergh, 29/21.
  Amyas, 30/10, Amiens.
  Anastase, 29/2.
  Andrew, 26/16, 23.
  Andwerp, 18/37; 19/1, Antwerp.
  Anselm, 26/34.
  Antonye, 27/15.
  Appolyn, 28/35, a man’s name.
  Aprille, 27/40.
  Aragon, 22/35.
  Ardane, 43/38, Ardennes.
  Arnold, 27/5.
  Arnold of Noirs, 24/33.
  Arondel, 24/21.
  Ascension Day, 28/16.  [[error for 28/14]]
  Aspremond, 24/35.
  Aubin, 27/10.
  August, 28/2, 34.
  Austria, 24/20.
  Austyn, 27/22.
  Austyns, 24/5, Augustinian friars.
  Auynyon, 22/20; 45/21, Avignon.

  Barnabe, 31/3.
  Bartilmews faire (Smithfield), 19/8.  [[error for 19/5]]
  Basil, 31/10.
  Bath, 18/27.
  Baudewyn, 30/1, Baldwin.
  Beane, 14/5, Beaune.
  Beatrice, the laundress, 31/26.
  Beaumound, 24/30.
  Belle, 18/33.
  Beme, 22/38, Bohemia.
  Benet, the churl, 30/8.
  Bernard, 30/15.
  Berow, 19/2; 24/31, Bergues.
  Berte, 31/30.
  Bertilmewe, 30/27, Bartholomew.
  Bertram, 30/36.
  Biauuays, 23/17, Beauvais.
  Boloyne, 24/27; 49/4; 50/14, Boulogne, close to Paris.
  Boniface, 30/22.
  Bousser, 24/31, Bourchier.
  Brabanders, 43/3.
  Bretaigne, 24/16, Brittany.
  Bristow, 18/27, Bristol.
  Bruges, 43/22; Brugges, 18/29, Bruges.
  Brussels, 18/36.
  Bryce, 31/18.
  Burgoyne, 24/19, Burgundy.
  Bussin, the hangman of Bruges, 43/21.

  Cambrigge, 19/8, Cambridge.
  Camerik, 23/19, Cambray.
  Candlemas Day, 28/22, Feb. 12.
  Catherine, the kempster, 32/18.
  Cathon, 9/27, Dionysius Cato.
  Caunterbury, 23/6.
  Cecile, 22/36, Sicily.
  Cecile, the spinster, 32/24, Cecilia.
  Chalons, 19/7.
  Charles of France, 30/1.
  Charter House, 24/4.
  Chestre, 23/13.
  Christian, the collar-maker, 46/26.
  Christine, the seduced, 46/30.
  Christmas, 28/15.  [[error for 28/13]]
  Cistiauls, 23/37, Cistercians.
  Clare, the blind, 33/6.
  Clare, St., 24/10.
  Clarice, the nopster, 33/12.
  Clemence, 32/39.
  Clement, 32/39.
  Clermonde, 24/26, Clermont.
  Cluny, 23/32.
  Colard, the goldsmith, 31/33; the fuller, 32/9.
  Coleyne, 23/8, Cologne.
  Colombe, 32/32.
  Comynes, 18/32.
  Conrad, the shearman, 32/13.
  Coventry, procession of, 28/32.
  Cyprian, the weaver, 31/39.

  Damian, the armourer, 33/32.
  Danes, 43/8.
  David, the bridle-maker, 33/21.
  Dendremonde, 18/34.
  Denis, the furbisher, 33/26.
  Denmarke, 23/1.
  Dixmuthe, 18/31.
  Donaas, the doublet-maker, 33/38.
  Dornyk, 18/30, Tournay.
  Dover, 24/29.

  Easter, 26/12.  [[correct line is 28/13]]
  Easterlings, 43/1.
  Elias, the painter, 34/19.
  Elzeter, 14/4; Aussy, Alsace.
  Englishmen, 30/5; 43/3.
  Englissh, 1/1.
  Englond, 14/16; 17/21, 24, 33; 22/32; 51/24.
  Ermentin, the sick man, 34/35.
  Eustace, the tailor, 34/1.
  Everard, the upholster, 34/13.

  Felice, the silkwoman, 36/20.
  Ferraunt, the hosier, 35/40.
  Feuerer, 27/39, February.
  Fierin, the baker, 35/28.
  Flaundres, 17/22; 24/25; 51/26, Flanders.
  Flemings, 43/4.
  Forker, the cordwainer, 35/39.  [[error for 35/35]]
  Francis, the draper, 35/9.
  Fraunce, 22/28; 24/34; 30/2, France.
  Frederick, the wine-crier, 35/23.
  Fremyn, the taverner, 35/17, Firmin.
  Frenchmen, 43/2.
  Frensshe, 1/1; 14/6; 51/37, French.
  Friseland, men of, 43/8.

  Gabriel, the linen-weaver, 38/9.
  Garnade, 14/8, Granada.
  Gascoyne, 14/9, Gascony.
  Gaunt, 18/29, Ghent.
  Genoese, 43/6.
  George, the bookseller, 38/31.
  Gerard, the miller, 36/27.
  Germole, 14/5.
  Gertrude, Gilbert’s sister, 39/14.
  Gervase, the scrivener, 36/35.
  Gervase, the smith, 39/10.
  Gheldreland, 24/18, Guelderland.
  Gherlin, the kettle-maker, 38/23.
  Ghyselin, the basket-maker, 38/19.
  Gilbert, 36/24; 39/14.
  God, 49/32; 50/17-19, 23-4 (see 55/2).
    [[i.e. English vocabulary entries for “God”, pg. 55 col. 2]]
  Gombert, the butcher, 37/31.
  Greek, 14/11.
  Guisebert, the bowmaker, 36/24.
  Guy, the fishmonger, 37/40.
  Guyan, 24/17, Guyenne.

  Haesburgh, 29/28.
  Harry, the painter, 39/23.
  Henaud, 24/28, Hainault.
  Heynewiers, 43/7, Hainaulters.
  Holand, 24/28.
  Hollanders, 43/7.
  Holy Ghost, 51/38.

  Isaac, the wineman, 46/37; the kettlemaker, 47/3.  [[error for 47/2]]

  Janiuer, 27/39, January.
  Jenewys, 43/6, Genoese.
  Jennette, the maid, 50/5.
  Jherusalem, 23/5.
  John, the usurer, 38/28.  [[error for 39/28]]
  Juyll, 28/2, July.
  Juyn, 28/1, June.

  Katherin, the kempster, 32/18.
  Kylian, and his fellows, 39/35.

  Lady, Our: her days in March (25) and Harvest (Aug. 15), 28/21, 25.
    [[error for 21, 23]]
  Lady, Our, of Boulogne, 49/4.
  Lambert, the carpenter, 39/39.
  Lamfroy, the tiler, 40/23.
  Lancaster, 24/15.
  Laurence, the mason, 40/8.
  Lenard, the thatcher, 40/29.
  Lewin, the brewer, 40/16.
  Lincoln, 23/14.
  Logier, the felt-maker, 40/37.
  Lombards, 43/4.
  London, 18/26; 19/6; 23/11; 51/33.
  Louayn, 18/37, Louvain.
  Lucian, the glover, 40/40.
  Lucy, the bastard, 41/8.
  Luke, 23/18, Liège.
  Lyon, the purse-maker, 41/1.  [[error for 41/4]]
  Lyons, 17/34.

  Mabel, the tailoress, 42/10.
  Marche, 27/40, March.
  Margret, 10/7.
  Martin, the grocer, 41/12.
  Mary, Virgin, 48/17 (_see_ Lady.)
  Mase, 12/18, the river Meuse.
  Maud, the cap-maker, 42/17.
  Maximian, the physician, 41/29.
  May, 28/1.
  Mence, 23/10, Mayence.
  Menyn, 18/32.
  Montpelier, 43/40.
  Morris, the surgeon, 41/20.

  Naples, 23/4.
  Natalia, the bathwoman, 42/27.
  Nauerne, 22/37, Navarre.
  New Year’s Day, 28/26.
  Nicholas, the mustard-maker, 42/21.
  Noirs, 24/33.
  Novembre, 28/4.

  Oberol, the innkeeper, 42/38.
  Octobre, 28/3.
  Ogier, the falconer, 43/36; the poulterer, 44/1.
  Oliver, the broker, 42/34.
  Onnour, keeper of the tower and prison, 43/9.
  Oseye, 14/8, Osoye, Alsace.
  Ostryche, 24/20, Austria.

  Palm Sunday, 28/25.
  Pardon of Sion, 28/33.
  Parys, 18/28; 23/15, Paris.
  Paul, the cooper, 44/16.
  Paulin, the corn-meter, 44/20.
  Peter, the wool-beater, 44/5.
  Philipote, the thieving maid, 36/5.
  Pieryne, Peter’s daughter, 44/26.
  Poole, 22/39, Poland.
  Poperyng, 18/33.
  Portingale, 23/2, Portugal.
  Portingalers, 43/5, Portuguese.
  Poytevyns, 43/2, folk of Poitou.
  Premonstrence, 23/40, Premonstratenses.
  Procession-Days, 28/31-2.

  Querine, the dice-maker, 44/37.
  Quintine, the toll-taker, 44/29.

  Randolf, the money-changer, 45/33.
  Reyner, the squire, 45/25.
  Reynes, 23/9, Reims.
  Richard, the carter, 45/10.
  Richard, the currier, 45/9.
  Robert, the messenger, 45/1.
  Roberte, the she-heckler, 45/5.
  Roen, 18/28; 23/9, Rouen.
  Roger, the sacristan, 45/20.
  Roland, the handworker, 45/17.
  Rome, 22/19, 22.
  Romeneye, 14/10, Romanée (?).
  Rynyssh, 14/4; 17/31, Rhenish.
  Ryselle, 18/31, Lille.

  Sacrament Day, 28/30.
  Salesbury, 19/4, Salisbury.
  Scotland, 23/3.
  Scots, 30/6; 43/6.
  Senlys, 23/16.
  Septembre, 28/3.
  Shrovetide, 28/24.
  Skepyns, 43/29; Eschevins (_see_ 59/1).
    [[i.e. English vocabulary entry “skepyns (Flemish aldermen)”,
    pg. 59 col. 1]]
  Spaniards, 43/5.
  Spayne, 14/6; 20/17, Spain.
  St. Bartholomew’s Fair, 19/5.
  St. Benet, 24/2, St. Benedict.
  St. Bernard, 23/38.
  St. Christopher’s Day, 28/20.
  St. Clare, 24/10.
  St. James, 49/3.
  St. John, 28/15.
  St. Kylian, 39/35.
  St. Martin’s Mass, 28/19.
  St. Omers, 18/35.
  St. Peter’s Day, 28/16.
  St. Pol, 24/27.
  St. Remigius, 28/17.
  Stephen, the glazier, 34/30.
  Sterbrigge, 19/3, Stourbridge.

  Terrewyn, 23/20, Touraine.
  Three-Kings’ Day, 28/27.
  Thursday, 38/16.
  Treyer, 23/10, Treves.
  Trinity term, 28/15.

  Valensynes, 18/35, Valenciennes.
  Valerian, the tawyer, 46/10.
  Vedast, the furrier, 46/19.

  Walburge, the pilch-maker, 46/23.
  Walram, the currier, 46/14.
  Walter, the paternoster-maker, 46/1.
  Westmestre, 19/9; 51/33, Westminster.
  Whitefriars, 42/33.
  Whitsuntide, 28/16.
  William, the brushmaker, 46/5.  [[error for 46/6]]
  Winchester, 23/12.
  Wyllemyns, 24/3, Guillelmins, friars.

  Xpristian, Xpristine, 46/26, 30, Christian, Christine.

  York, 18/26; 23/7; 24/12; 28/31 (procession).  [[error for 24/14]]
  Ypre, 18/30, Ypres.
  Ysaac, the wyneman, 46/37; the kettlemaker, 47/3.  [[error for 47/2]]
  Ysores, the joiner, 46/34.

  Zachary, the proctor, 47/9.




LIST OF FRENCH WORDS

(_For the modern meanings of Caxton’s englishings, see the ‘List of
English Words,’ pp._ 53-60 _above_.)


  +a+, 47/18, on.
  +a+ b c, 2/11.
  +abbes+, 2/4, abbotes.
  +abuures+, 49/36, watred.
  +accidens+, 38/40, accidents.
  +acertes+, 16/1, certainly.
  +achates+, 10/9, bye.
  +acheuee+, 38/15, ended.
  +achier+, 21/22, steell.
  +acompaignie+, 45/27, acompanyed,
  +acompter+, 3/7, rekene.
  +acquite+, 37/29, acquite.
  +a+ dieu, 49/2, to god.
  +aduiegne+, 36/18, come.
  +aduises+, 48/11, aduised.
  +affiert+, 4/8, behoueth.
  +afourceurs+, 43/14, rauisshers.
  +ahanne+, 45/12, ered.
  +ahontier+, 37/14, shame.
  +aies+, 4/39, haue.
  +aigles+, 11/24, eygles.
  +ailleurs+, 3/30, somwhere els.
  +ainchois+, 26/2, er;
    27/8, erst.
  +ainsi+, 5/23, thus.
  +aisies+, 49/19, easyd (_see_ aysies).
  +al+, 27/11, at the.
  +ale fois+, 18/22, othir while.
  +alesnes+, 21/34, alles.
  +allez+, 5/27, goo.
  +alme+, 16/27, soule.
  +aloses+, 12/7, alouses.
  +alouwes+, 11/2, larkes.
  +aloyeres+, 21/32, pawteners.
  +alumes+, 50/5, lyghte.
  +alun+, 20/35, alume.
  +amaine+, 25/25, bryng.
  +amandes+, 13/9, almandes.
  +amenra+, 40/10, shal brynge.
  +ameroie mieulx+, 15/37, had I leuer.
  +amye+, 4/35, frende;
    29/14, lyef.
  +angeles+, 48/20, angelis.
  +anguilles+, 12/12, eelis.
  +anijs+, 20/3, anyse.
  +annettes+, 10/38, doukes.
  +annyuersaire+, 25/32, yeres mynde.
  +anthan+, 32/5, foryere.
  +aoust+, 28/23, heruest.
  +apostles+, 48/18, apostles,
  +apostumes+, 41/23, apostomes.
  +apotecaires+, 1/22, apotecaries.
  +apparaillies+, 4/15, redy.
  +appelle+, 16/34, called.
  +appertient+, 8/6, belongeth.
  +appiert+, 37/34, appereth.
  +apportes+, 29/32, brynge.
  +aprendre+, 1/4, lerne.
  +apres+, 11/33, herafter.
  +aprise+, 29/16, taught.
  +Apuril+, 27/40, April.
  +arain+, 21/23, bras.
  +arblastriers+, 36/26, arblastrers.
  +arbres+, 13/10, trees.
  +arceniers+, 2/20, boumakers.
  +archangeles+, 48/20, archangelis.
  +archeuesques+, 2/4, archebisshops.
  +arcs+, 36/25, bowes.
  +arde+, 30/26, (that it) brenne.
  +argent+, 18/12, siluer.
  +armoyer+, 33/32, armorer.
  +arrester+, 26/8, tarieng.
  +artetique+, 42/7, goute.
  +asnes+, 11/20, asses.
  +assaye+, 26/18, assayed.
  +assemble+, 39/32, gadred to gedyr.
  +asseoir+, 8/5, to sette.
  +asses+, 29/20, ynough.
  +asuret+, 14/36, y-asured.
  +attendre+, 14/25, taryeng.
  +aual+, 1/8, langyng;
    6/19, after.
  +auantage+, 46/11, auantage.
  +auaynne+, 22/10, otes.
  +aucteur+, 3/33, auctour.
  +aucunes+, 48/35, ony.
  +auenture+, 29/10, auenture.
  +aueugle+, 33/6, blynde.
  +auiourdhuy+, 32/7, this day.
  +aulmosne+, 33/8, almesse.
  +aulnes+, 16/21, elles.
  +aultrement+, 37/24, othirwyse.
  +aultres+, 9/6, othir.
  +aulx+, 8/25, garlyk.
  +aunte+, 6/3, aunte.
  +aurain+, 32/19, right now (_see_ orains).
  +aussi+, 49/40, also.
  +auwes+, 10/38, ghees.
  +aysies+, 48/31, at his ease (_see_ aisies).

  +bachinnet+, 33/34, bacenet.
  +bachins+, 7/8, basyns.
  +bachon+, 10/23, bacon.
  +baillies+, 17/13, gyue.
  +bailly+, 30/10, baylly.
  +balainnes+, 12/2, whales.
  +ballances+, 21/11, balances.
  +balles+, 20/36, bales.
  +bancs+, 7/4, benches.
  +banerets+, 24/33, banerett.
  +bankers+, 7/1, bankers.
  +banny+, 43/34, banysshed.
  +barbier+, 47/12, barbour.
  +bargaigne+, 10/24, chepe (_see_ bergaignier).
  +baron+, 46/25, husbonde.
  +barons+, 2/8, barons.
  +bas+, 34/36, softe.
  +basenne+, 19/26, basenne.
  +basse+, 6/31, lowe.
  +bastard+, 14/7, bastard.
  +bastarde+, 41/8, bastarde.
  +bateiller+, 35/6, fighten.
  +bateure+, 44/5, betar.
  +batteries+, 38/26, baterye.
  +baysier+, 32/35, kyssed.
  +becq+, 26/33, beck.
  +becques+, 12/13, pikes.
  +becquets+, 12/13, pikerellis.
  +beestes+, 1/9, bestis.
  +beghines+, 24/11, beghyns.
  +belfroy+, 40/24, steple.
  +belle+, 29/18, faire.
  +berchie+, 33/17, rocked.
  +bergaignier+, 14/28, bergayne (_see_ bargaigne).
  +besoing est+, 6/22, it be to doo.
  +besongnes+, 6/18, thinges.
  +betes+, 13/32, betes.
  +beuurages+, 1/17, drynkes.
  +beuuries+, 27/9, (ye) shall drynke.
  +biau+, 30/33, fayr;
    _b. sire_, 18/3, fair sire.
  +biaucop+, 36/9, many.
  +bien+, 4/39, well.
  +biens+, 29/20, goodes.
  +bisse+, 10/27, hyndecalf.
  +blances+, 13/18, white.
  +bled+, 13/40, whete.
  +bleu+, 14/36, blyew.
  +bogars+ (_? for_ +begars+), 24/6, lewd freris.
  +boire+, 28/35, ete (_instead of_ drynke).
  +boit on+, 14/22, drynke me.
  +bonnes+, 52/3, good.
  +borages+, 13/37, borage.
  +bordures+, 22/5, broythures.
  +boucerie+, 37/32, bocherie.
  +bouche+, 29/39, mouth.
  +bouchiers+, 2/21, bochiers.
  +boucle+, 21/28, bocle.
  +bouk+, 19/23, bukke.
  +boulengiers+, 2/19, bakers.
  +boulie+, 14/19, boulye.
  +bouly+, 12/35, soden.
  +bouriaulx+, 43/22, hangman.
  +bourre+, 6/36, flockes.
  +boursiers+, 2/28, pursers.
  +boursses+, 21/29, purses.
  +bousiaux+, 25/39, bootes.
  +bouter+, 37/37, to put.
  +boutoirs+, 10/40, butores.
  +boys+, 13/22, wodes.
  +boysteuse+, 32/32, halting.
  +boz+, 7/27, wode.
  +braieul+, 8/38, pauntcher.
  +brandeurs+, 8/8, andyrons.
  +brasse+, 40/17, breweth.
  +brasseur+, 40/16, brewar.
  +brayes+, 8/37, briches.
  +brebys+, 12/29, sheep.
  +bresmes+, 12/7, bremes.
  +breuiares+, 39/8, portoses.
  +brezil+, 20/18, brasyll.
  +briefment+, 3/16, shortly.
  +browet+, 10/20, browet.
  +brun+, 20/1, broun.
  +bryef+, 4/25, _le plus b._, the shortest.
  +bue+, 14/24, wesshe;
    +buera+, 31/28, shall wassh.
  +buef+, 10/14, bueff.
  +burchmaistre+, 44/13, bourghmaistre.
  +bure+, 9/5, butter.
  +buuerons+, 26/26, shall we drynke.
  +buuraiges+, 14/3, drynkes.
  +buuray ie+, 28/37, shall I drynke.

  +cabellau+, 12/3, coddelyng.
  +calys+, 7/2, chalon.
  +cammelle+, 20/2, cammelle.
  +caniuet+, 47/23, penknyf.
  +cannes+, 7/10, cannes.
  +car+, 9/26, for.
  +cardinaulz+, 2/3, cardinals.
  +cardons+, 13/28, thistles.
  +carmes+, 24/5, white freris.
  +carpres+, 12/12, carpes.
  +Cathon+, 9/27, Cathon.
  +catons+, 38/38, catons.
  +cattel+, 15/12, catell.
  +catz+, 11/19, cattes.
  +caulx+, 40/14, chalke.
  +ce que+, 1/4, that which.
  +celee+, 37/9, secrete.
  +celuy+, 5/9, hym.
  +censes+, 37/5, fermes.
  +cerenceresse+, 45/5, heklester.
  +cerench+, 45/7, hekell.
  +certainement+, 5/16, certaynely.
  +certes+, 16/5, certaynly.
  +cesse+, 34/7, resteth.
  +cestui+, 3/29, this.
  +cha+, 25/25, hyther;
    de cha, 44/28, on this side.
  +chaiers+, 7/4, chayers.
  +chainture+, 31/35, gyrdle.
  +chambre+, 31/32, chambre.
  +chandelliere+, 47/6, candelmaker.
  +chandeloer+, 28/22, candlemasse.
  +chandeylles+, 47/7, candellis.
  +change+, 45/34, change.
  +changiers+, 2/33, chaungers.
  +channeue+, 45/6, hempe (_see_ chenneue).
  +channonnes+, 23/30, chanons.
  +chapelrie+, 45/23, fre chapell.
  +chapitle+, 15/4, chapitre.
  +chappelains+, 24/7, chappelains.
  +chappon+, 10/33, capon.
  +chappron+, 4/18, hood.
  +chareton+, 45/10, cartar.
  +charge+, 48/6, charge.
  +charpentier+, 40/3, to tymbre.
  +charpentiers+, 2/27, carpenters.
  +chars+, 1/9, flessh.
  +chartres+, 36/36, chartres.
  +chartreurs+, 24/4, monkes of chartre hous.
  +chastel+, 40/1, castell.
  +chastelain+, 24/29, castelayn.
  +chastoyes+, 9/32, chastyse.
  +chaude+, 50/8, hoot.
  +chaudel+, 14/1, caudell.
  +chaudiers+, 7/7, ketellis.
  +chaudrelier+, 38/23, ketelmaker.
  +chaudrens+, 7/6, kawdrons.
  +chauetiers+, 2/28, cobelers.
  +chauist+, 42/11, cheuissheth.
  +chault+, 27/18, reccheth.
  +chault+, 27/4, hete.
  +chausies+, 25/39, do on.
  +chausser+, 35/40, hosyer.
  +chemises+, 8/37, chertes.
  +chemyn+, 26/4, way.
  +chenneue+, 20/13, hempseed (_see_ channeue).
  +cheoir+, 25/11, falle.
  +cherfeul+, 13/32, cheruyll.
  +cherises+, 13/5, cheryes.
  +cherisier+, 13/11, cherye tree.
  +cherront+, 25/11, shalle fall.
  +chescun+, 1/7, euery ... othir.
  +chesne+, 13/13, ooke.
  +cheual+, 25/26, hors.
  +cheualiers+, 2/8, knyghtes.
  +cheuaucheray+, 25/29, (I) shall ryde.
  +chielliers+, 6/30, selers.
  +chien+, 41/3, hound.
  +chier+, 35/34, dere.
  +chieuerel+, 10/23, gheet.
  +chincque+, 17/25, fiue.
  +chire+, 20/25, waxe.
  +chose+, 5/6, thyng.
  +chucre+, 20/1, sugre.
  +chuynes+, 11/3, storkes.
  +chyens+, 49/25, here withinne.
  +cierf+, 41/2, herte.
  +cignes+, 11/3, swannes (_see_ signes).
  +cirurgiens+, 25/9, surgyens.
  +cite+, 42/29, cite.
  +clarey+, 14/12, clarey.
  +clau+, 19/13, nayll.
  +claux+, 41/22, soores.
  +clercq+, 23/33, clerke.
  +clere+, 34/40, clere.
  +clergesses+, 24/11, clergesses.
  +clocque+, 30/15, belle.
  +clocques+, 8/31, clokes.
  +clocquiers+, 49/15, steples.
  +coc+, 10/34, cocke.
  +coffyns+, 21/33, coffyns.
  +cognoissaunce+, 4/13, knowelech.
  +cognossies+, 4/12, knowe.
  +combien+, 16/13, how moche.
  +commandement+, 9/26, commaundement.
  +commandes+, 5/8, commaunde.
  +comme+, 5/9, as.
  +commence+, 1/1, begynneth.
  +comment+, 1/7, how.
  +commin+, 19/40, comyne.
  +compaignon+, 4/35, felawe.
  +companye+, 26/5, companye.
  +compenaiges+, 1/13, whyte mete.
  +complye+, 27/30, complyne.
  +comprinses+, 3/35, comprised.
  +comptez+, 17/17, telle.
  +conclure+, 25/20, conclude.
  +conduyse+, 5/24, conduyte.
  +confections+, 20/4, confections.
  +confesseray+, 16/30, shriue.
  +confesseur+, 48/6, confessour.
  +confite+, 13/19, confyte.
  +congie+, 5/22, leue.
  +congres+, 12/8, congres.
  +conins+, 9/2, conyes.
  +connestable+, 24/34, conestable.
  +conseil+, 9/27, counseill.
  +contenant+, 47/4, conteynyng.
  +content+, 16/39, content.
  +contesse+, 24/39, countesse.
  +contre+, 31/31, ayenst.
  +contre+, 49/13, contre.
  +conuient+, 6/30, behoueth.
  +copee+, 36/15, cutte.
  +copies+, 36/39, copies.
  +corbelliers+, 2/24, maundemakers.
  +corbilles+, 38/21, mandes.
  +cordewan+, 19/24, cordewan.
  +cordewaniers+, 2/19, shoomakers.
  +cornes+, 46/5, hornes.
  +cornets a encre+, 21/35, enke hornes.
  +coroucies+, 31/6, angre.
  +coroyes+, 21/26, gyrdellis.
  +corps+, 31/17, body.
  +cosynes+, 6/4, nieces.
  +cosyns+, 6/4, cosyns.
  +cottes+, 8/32, cotes.
  +couchier+, 50/2, to slepe.
  +couleur+, 34/26, colour.
  +coulles+, 13/30, cool.
  +coulons+, 10/39, dowues.
  +coultiers+, 2/30, brokers.
  +countes+, 2/7, erles.
  +coupes+, 8/17, couppes.
  +courans+, 44/19, lekyng.
  +coure+, 46/17, coryeth.
  +courechiefs+, 42/14, keuerchifs.
  +couretage+, 42/35, brocorage.
  +couretier+, 42/34, brocour.
  +coureur+, 46/14, coryer.
  +court+, 40/2, court.
  +courtil+, 45/13, herber.
  +courtoyses+, 5/12, courtoys.
  +courtoysie+, 18/16, courtosye.
  +cousin+, 30/1, cosin.
  +coussins+, 50/10, quysshons.
  +couste+, 31/10, coste.
  +coustre+, 45/20, sextayn.
  +coustriers+, 34/9, sowers.
  +coustures+, 42/20, semes.
  +cousturiers+, 2/29, shepsters.
  +cousues+, 36/2, sewed.
  +coutieaulx+, 8/11, knyues.
  +couuercles+, 7/35, couercles.
  +couuertoyrs+, 6/40, couerlettes.
  +couuerture+, 47/17, coueryng.
  +couureurs de tieulles & destrain+, 2/26, tylers and thatchers.
  +couurir+, 6/39, couere.
  +coyfes+, 21/38, coyfes.
  +craisme+, 12/38, kreme.
  +crappes+, 46/39, grapes.
  +cras+, 44/3, fatte.
  +crasseries+, 1/25, coriars.
  +crea+, 47/34, made.
  +creuiches+, 12/15, creuyches.
  +creusse+, 16/33, trusted.
  +crieres+, 35/23, criar.
  +cristal+, 46/3, cristall.
  +croire+, 35/20, _a c._, to borowe.
  +croix+, 15/40, crosse.
  +croys+, 15/26, (I) bileue.
  +cubelles+, 19/39, cubibes.
  +cuide+, 11/10, wende (_should be_ wene).
  +cuir+, 7/27, lether.
  +cuit+, 14/11, soden, boiled.
  +curats+, 24/7, curattes.
  +cure+, 11/17, _ont c._, recche.
  +cure+, 45/23, cure.
  +curer+, 41/38, cure.
  +cures+, 51/39, hertes.
  +cuueliers+, 2/31, coupers.
  +cuues+, 44/17, keupis.
  +cuyrs+, 1/21, hydes.
  +cy+, 9/10, here.

  +dades+, 13/9, dates.
  +dame+, 15/13, dame.
  +damoysellys+, 4/19, damoyselles.
  +dampnes+, 45/37, dampned.
  +dangereux+, 32/12, dangerous.
  +debonnair+, 9/39, buxom.
  +deboute+, 16/26, ende.
  +debtes+, 36/38, dettes.
  +debues+, 17/16, owe.
  +debuoit+, 44/32, ought.
  +declaire+, 3/29, declared.
  +dedens+, 7/3, therin.
  +dedicacion+, 19/7, chirchehalyday.
  +dedicasse+, 46/2, dedicacion.
  +deduit+, 29/12, byledyng.
  +dees+, 44/38, dyse.
  +deffendu+, 44/8, forboden.
  +degretz+, 14/32, steyres.
  +demain+, 32/2, to morow.
  +demande+, 15/36, axed.
  +demeure+, 22/20, duelleth.
  +demye+, 16/24, half.
  +dencoste+, 37/32, beside.
  +deniers+, 3/8, pens.
  +denrees+, 18/1, peny worthes;
    4/2, wares.
  +departes+, 26/2, departe.
  +deportes+, 9/25, forbere.
  +deriere+, 42/33, after.
  +derrain+, 18/19, last.
  +descouuert+, 40/28, discouerid.
  +deseruyr+, 5/15, deserue.
  +deshaities+, 35/13, (them) that be not hole.
  +desirees+, 45/35, desired.
  +desiunes+, 26/1, _vos d._, breke your fast.
  +despites+, 10/4, despyse.
  +dessoubs+, 7/2, under.
  +dessus+, 38/7, to-fore.
  +destaindera+, 34/28, shall stayne.
  +destrier+, 45/30, stede.
  +desvestues+, 8/39, vnclothed.
  +detenray+, 16/31, with-holde.
  +detier+, 44/37, dysemaker.
  +deuant+, 18/13, tofore.
  +deuantdittes+, 7/39, forsaid.
  +deuenir+, 4/5, to become.
  +deuiser+, 14/27, deuise.
  +dextre+, 49/8, right.
  +dictes+, 26/14, saye.
  +digerer+, 11/7, dygeste.
  +diligement+, 4/6, diligently.
  +diuerses+, 25/16, diuerse.
  +doctrinaulx+, 38/38, doctrinals.
  +doctrine+, 1/2, lernynge.
  +doibt+, 9/28, 37/21, ought;
    31/34, oweth;
    40/3, oughteth.
  +doinst+, 4/32, gyue.
  +doleurs+, 41/34, payne.
  +dommage+, 34/25, harme.
  +donats+, 38/40, donettis.
  +doner+, 17/37, gyue.
  +donroye+, 15/24, (I) wold yeue.
  +dont+, 11/17, wherof.
  +doresenauant+, 25/15, fro hens forth.
  +dormier+, 27/20, slepyng.
  +doulce+, 38/5, fressh.
  +dousaines+, 46/4, doseyns.
  +doyens+, 23/26, denes.
  +drappiers+, 2/18, drapers.
  +draps+, 14/34, clothes.
  +drechies+, 31/23, dresse.
  +dresce+, 26/38, dresse.
  +droit+, 15/20, right.
  +ducesse+, 24/39, duchesse.
  +ducs+, 2/7, dukes.
  +duel+, 29/10, sorow.
  +dyne+, 29/3, dyne.
  +dyre+, 4/26, saye.

  +eauwe+, 38/5, water.
  +eglise+, 22/15, chirche.
  +eguilles+, 21/31, nedles.
  +electuaires+, 20/8, electuaries.
  +emble+, 8/22, stolen.
  +embrief+, 15/8, in shorte.
  +empereur+, 22/23, emperour.
  +empetrer+, 45/22, to gete.
  +emplist+, 20/26, fyllyd.
  +emploier+, 20/20, bystowe.
  +employer+, 50/20, fulcome.
  +emporter+, 18/8, bere.
  +en+, 3/13, therof;
    20/34, therwyth.
  +encordont+, 40/27, neuertheles.
  +encore+, 13/29, yet.
  +encountres+, 4/11, mete.
  +encre+, 39/5, ynke.
  +endementiers+, 14/26, whiles.
  +enfans+, 5/32, children.
  +engaignies+, 5/18, deceyued.
  +engloys+, 3/16, englyssh.
  +enluminees+, 39/1, enlumined.
  +enprintees+, 38/36, enprinted.
  +ensamble+, 29/20, to gedyr.
  +entendes+, 9/11, understande.
  +entier+, 15/7, hole.
  +entour+, 45/16, aboute.
  +entre+, 30/5, bitwene.
  +entremayns+, 18/7, under hande.
  +entremelle+, 20/40, entremete.
  +entrepers+, 14/38, sad blew.
  +entreprendre+, 3/38, entreprise.
  +enuers+, 9/40, vnto.
  +envoyes+, 9/36, sende.
  +enuys+, 33/10, not gladly.
  +esbourier+, 33/15, to noppe.
  +esbourysse+, 33/12, nopster.
  +escarlate+, 15/1, scarlet.
  +eschappent+, 43/33, escape.
  +escheuins+, 43/29, skepyns.
  +esclefins+, 12/3, haddoks.
  +esclire+, 50/21, lyghtneth.
  +escochoys+, 30/6, scottes.
  +escouffles+, 11/26, kytes.
  +escoutes+, 50/21, herke.
  +escoutetes+, 43/28, scoutes.
  +escrijn+, 8/20, cheste.
  +escrips+, 25/13, wreton.
  +escript+, 3/25, writing.
  +escriptoires+, 21/33, penners.
  +escripuains+, 2/20, skriueners.
  +escu+, 39/24, shelde.
  +escures+, 31/30, skowre.
  +escutz+, 17/32, scutes.
  +escuyelles+, 7/31, disshes.
  +escuyers+, 2/8, squyers.
  +esparlens+, 12/5, sprotte.
  +espaude+, 31/20, sholdre.
  +especiers+, 2/29, spycers.
  +espee+, 33/27, swerd.
  +espengles+, 21/31, pynnes.
  +esperite+, 3/19, ghoost.
  +esperons+, 25/40, spores.
  +espices+, 14/13, spices.
  +espinces+, 13/37, spynache.
  +espinier+, 13/15, thorne.
  +espoye+, 31/21, spete.
  +espreuiers+, 11/25, sperhawkes.
  +esquiekeliet+, 14/39, chekeryd.
  +estain+, 21/22, tynne.
  +estaulx+, 26/35, trestles.
  +estenelle+, 8/9, tonge, pair of tongs.
  +estoet+, 43/12, _mestoet_, standeth me (_a mistranslation_).
    [[correct line is 6/16]]
  +estoupper+, 34/14, stoppe.
  +estrain+, 7/3, strawe.
  +estraines+ (verb), 49/35, strawe.
  +estrangiers+, 42/31, strangers.
  +estrelins+, 17/35, sterlingis.
  +esturgeon+, 12/7, sturgeon.
  +estuuer+, 42/31, to be stewed.  [[error for 42/30]]
  +estuues+, 42/27, stewes.
  +eternalite+, 45/39, eternalite.
  +euangelistes+, 48/19, euangelistes.
  +euesques+, 2/3, bisshops.
  +eulx+, 23/21, them.
  +eur+, 29/22, happe, fortune, luck.
  +euure+, 30/16, werke.
  +excusera+, 37/28, shall excuse.

  +faictes+, 4/37, do.
  +failloit+, 18/4, failled.
  +faing+, +fain+, 13/27, 49/34, heye.
  +farine+, 36/30, mele.
  +fauconner+, 43/36, fauconer.
  +faucons+, 11/25, faucons.
  +fault+, 38/13, lacketh.
  +faulte+, 37/24, faulte.
  +faulx monnoyers+, 43/13, false money makers.
  +feest+, 38/24, fayre.
  +femmes+, 2/9, wymmen.
  +fenestres+, 40/13, wyndowes.
  +feneulle+, 13/36, fenell.
  +fer+, 21/22, yron.
  +feroit+, 5/10, doo.
  +ferres+, 25/33, shoed.
  +feu+, 30/22, fyer.
  +feues+, 13/39, benes.
  +feultier+, 40/37, feltmaker.
  +feultre+, 40/39, felte.
  +feure+, 39/10, smyth.
  +fien+, 45/11, dong.
  +fieures+, 42/2, fever.
  +figes+, 13/8, fyggis.
  +figier+, 13/12, fygtree.
  +fil+, 32/28, yarne.
  +filee+, 32/27, sponne (_the verb_).
  +fileresses+, 2/15, spynsters.
  +fillaistre+, 32/39, stepdoughter.
  +filles+, 5/34, doughtres (_see_ fylle).
  +filleule+, 44/26, _mistranslated_ doughter.
  +filz+, 3/18, soone (_see_ fyltz).
  +fin+, 39/38, ende.
  +finent+, 6/14, enden.
  +fist prendre+, 36/12, toke.
  +flairans+, 13/17, smellyng.
  +flans+, 12/34, flawnes.
  +fleur+, 20/2, flour.
  +fleurdelyts+, 13/20, lelyes.
  +florins+, 17/31, guldrens.
  +flua+, 47/16, flued.
  +foire+, 19/8, faire.
  +fois+, 18/22, while.
  +folye+, 45/38, folye.
  +fontaine+, 14/22, welle watre.
  +forcettes+, 47/23, sheris.
  +forches+, 21/36, sheres.
  +forchier+, 8/21;
    forcier, 46/35, forcier, forcer.
  +forgierel+, 36/7, forcyer.
  +formes+, 51/34, fourmes.
  +fors+, 9/20, othirwyse;
    fors que, 49/30, but.
  +fouines+, 11/18, fichews.
  +fouler+, 32/10, fulle.
  +foulons+, 2/14, fullers.
  +four+, 31/18, ouen.
  +fourbier+, 33/31, furbysshe.
  +fourbisseur+, 33/26, fourbysshour.
  +fourdines+, 13/5, sloes.
  +fourmage+, 9/4, chese.
  +fourment+, 22/8, white.
  +fourrures+, 8/33, furres.
  +fouys+, 45/14, doluen.
  +foy+, 37/17, faith.
  +foye+, 26/28, lyuer.
  +frain+, 25/28, brydle.
  +franchin+, 47/17, franchyn.
  +franchise+, 32/17, franchise.
  +fransoys+, 3/16, frenssh.
  +fremauls+, 39/2, claspes.
  +fremme+, 50/12, shette.
  +freres mineurs+, 24/3, frere menours.
  +frescz+, 12/8, fressh.
  +freses+, 13/6, strawberies.
  +fresne+, 13/14, asshe.
  +fromages+, 12/26, chese.
  +frotte+, 35/2, rubbe.
  +fustane+, 36/11, fustain.
  +fylle+, 46/30, _mistranslated_ doughter (_see_ filles).
  +fyltz+, 5/34, sones (_see_ filz).

  +gaignier+, 15/13, wynne.
  +gaires+, 27/35, moche.
  +galentine+, 42/24, galentyne.
  +galigan+, 19/38, galingale.
  +galles+, 30/24, galles.
  +galoches+, 35/39, galoches.
  +gansailliede+, 42/26, ganselyn.
  +garce+, 44/27, ghyrle.
  +gardiens+, 23/27, wardeyns.
  +gardins+, 13/25, gardyns.
  +garnars+, 12/20, shrimpes.
  +garnee+, 13/40, furmente.
  +gaucquier+, 13/14, nokertree.
  +gaufres+, 12/40, wafres.
  +gaune+, 14/37, yelow.
  +gaunisse+, 42/3, jaundyse.
  +gauns+, 33/37, gloues.
  +gauntiers+, 2/24, glouers.
  +gehy+, 43/24, knowlechid.
  +gelines+, 11/4, hennes.
  +gelouffre+, 13/35, geloffres.
  +general+, 19/10, general.
  +genise+, 10/19, hawgher.
  +gens+, 9/40, folke.
  +germains+, 6/5, germayns.
  +gesir+, 6/35, to lye.
  +gingembre+, 19/38, gynger.
  +glorie+, 52/5, glorie.
  +gloutee+, 33/20, lichorous.
  +gluy+, 40/31, reed.
  +gorge+, 35/22, throte.
  +gorgiere+, 33/36, gorgette.
  +goriaulx+, 46/28, coliers.
  +goriel+, 46/27, coler.
  +gorliers+, 2/37, gorelmakers;
    gorlier, 46/26, colermaker.
  +gouttans+, 44/19, droppyng.
  +gouuions+, 12/16, gogeorns.
  +grace+, 17/3, 51/38, grace.
  +graffes+, 21/34, poyntels.
  +graine+, 13/19, grayne.
  +graine de paradis+, 20/3, graynes of paradys.
  +graines+, 2/1, graynes.
  +grange+, 40/2, berne.
  +grauelle+, 41/28, grauelle.
  +grauwet+, 8/10, flessh hoke.
  +greigneur+, 22/25, grettest.
  +greniers+, 6/28, garettis.
  +gresille+, 50/22, haylleth.
  +greueroit+, 11/6, shold greue.
  +greyl+, 8/9, gredyron.
  +griffons+, 11/24, griffons.
  +gros+, 17/21, grotes.
  +gros+, 46/4, _en g._, in grete.
  +grouseillers+, 13/23, brembles.
  +grouselles+, 13/23, bremble beries.
  +gruwell+, 14/2, growell.
  +grys+, 23/36, gray.
  +guades+, 20/38, wood.
  +guarance+, 20/38, mader.
  +guarir+, 41/21, hele.
  +guerres+, 25/3, werres.
  +Guillemynes+, 24/3, Wyllemyns.
  +gyste+, 49/18, loggyng.

  +halle+, 14/30, halle.
  +hanap+, 26/37, 28/39, cuppe;
    hanaps, 8/15, cuppes.
  +harpoit+, 20/22, rosyn.
  +hastiuement+, 32/8, hastyly.
  +haubergon+, 33/35, habergeon.
  +hault+, 37/12, hye;
    plus haulx, 22/17, hyest.
  +hayes+, 13/21, hedges.
  +herbegier+, 49/26, be logged.
  +herbes+, 13/17 herbes.
  +herencs+, 12/8, hering.
  +herytables+, 37/4, heritable.
  +heucque+, 16/18, hewke.
      [_Huque_, f., a Huke or Dutch mantle, or Dutch woman’s mantle.
      --Cotgrave.]
  +heure+, 35/32, hour.
  +hier+, 32/4, yesterday.
  +honnourablement+, 45/28, worshipfully.
  +hors+, 5/2, out.
  +hostel+, 5/31, herberow.
  +hosteliers+, 2/30, hosteliers.
  +hostes+, 42/39, ghestes.
  +huche+, 8/20, whutche.
  +huchiers+, 2/37, joyners.
  +hugiers+, 46/34, joynar.
  +huues+, 42/19, huues.
  +huuetier+, 42/17, huue or calle maker.
  +huuettes+, 21/37, huues.
  +huymais+, 30/28, this day.
  +huys+, 27/11, dore.

  +ia+, 16/30, therof.
  +Jacopins+, 24/4, blac freris.
  +iamais+, 27/34, neuer.
  +ietter+, 40/22, to cast.
  +ignourance+, 37/27, ignorance.
  +innocens+, 48/25, innocentes.
  +instrues+, 9/33, enforme.
  +instrumens+, 36/37, instrumentis.
  +inuocacion+, 1/5, callyng.
  +Joefdy+, 38/16, Thursday.
  +jofnes+, 9/35, yong.
  +jougleurs+, 2/35, pleyers.
  +jour+, 27/3, day.
  +joustemens+, 25/2, joustynges.
  +joyaulx+, 8/21, jewellis.
  +joye+, 39/38, ioye.
  +iuments+, 11/15, mares.
  +iura+, 32/20, swore.
  +iusques+, 27/29, vntil.
  +iuste+, 47/40, rightfull.

  +kalendiers+, 39/4, kalenders.
  +keneule+, 32/27, dystaf.
  +keut+, 42/20, soweth.
  +keuure+, 35/3, couer.
  +keuure+, 7/6, keuuer, 7/35, coppre.
  +kieultes+, 6/38, quiltes.

  +la+, 25/30, there.
  +lachets+, 21/40, laces.
  +laict+, 12/25, mylke.
  +laigne+, 8/7, woode.
  +laines+, 1/20, wulle.
  +laires+, 15/30, (ye) shall leue.
  +laisse+, 5/15, late.
  +laissier+, 16/3, to leue.
  +laittues+, 13/34, letews.
  +lances+, 45/31, speres.
  +languers+, 42/8, seknesses.
  +lannieres+, 21/40, poyntes.
  +largesse+, 16/23, brede.
  +laronnes+, 43/12, theues.
  +lasartz+, 11/28, lizarts.
  +lasses+, 22/12, wery.
  +lattes+, 40/32, latthes.
  +laue+, 26/36, wasshe.
  +lauendier+, 31/26, lauendre.
  +lauoirs+, 7/8, lauours.
  +legierment+, 35/22, lyghtly.
  +les+, 47/18, syde.
  +lesons+, 7/5, lystes.
  +lettres+, 30/7, lettres.
  +leuain+, 14/20, leuayn.
  +leuer+, 27/19, risyng.
  +librarier+, 38/31, booke sellar.
  +libraries+, 2/23, librariers.
  +lieu+, 38/7, place.
  +lieue+, 27/16, ariseth.
  +lieures+, 9/2, hares.
  +lieutenant+, 30/9, lieutenant.
  +lieuwes+, 49/17, myle.
  +ligne+, 31/28, lynnen.
  +lignes+, 3/33, lynes.
  +limoges+, 11/1, heth hennes.
  +lin+, 38/11, flaxe.
  +linchieux+, 8/23, shetes.
  +lingnuyse+, 20/12, lynseed.
  +lire+, 9/37, rede.
  +lits+, 6/33, beddes.
  +liurer+, 34/5, deliuere.
  +liures+, 3/8, poundes.
  +liuret+, 50/33, litell book.
  +livre+, 3/21, book.
  +loe+, 18/3, _ie me l._, I am well plesyd.
  +loiaulte+, 36/19, trowthe.
  +loijer+, 48/27, reward.
  +longement+, 4/40, longe.
  +loques+, 12/16, loches.
  +lormiers+, 2/16, bridelmakers.
  +lots+, +lotz+, 7/18, 20, stope, stopes.
  +louche+, 8/4, ladle;
    louches, 7/40, spones.
  +loups+, 11/18, wulues.
  +loy+, 37/17, law.
  +loyes+, 39/2, bounden.
  +loysir+, 46/7, leyzer.
  +lu[c]es+, 12/13, luses.
  +lupars+, 11/19, lupardis.
  +luysel+, 46/36, cheste, box.
  +luytant+, 33/5, wrastlying.

  +machon+, 40/8, masone.
  +machonner+, 40/9, masone.
  +madame+, 46/20, my lady.
  +magre+, 44/4, lene.
  +main+, 49/6, hande.
  +maine+, 25/36, lede.
  +mainouurier+, 45/17, handwerker.
  +maintenant+, 9/12, right forth,
  +maintenier+, 6/29, mayntene.
  +maintes+, 18/24, many.
  +maisement+, 11/12, euyll.
  +maisnye+, 5/35, meyne, household.
  +maistres+, 23/28, maisters.
  +malade+, 34/35, seke.
  +mal du chief+, 41/33, heed ache.
  +malefaicteurs+, 43/23, euyll doers.
  +mal es dens+, 41/36, toth ache.
  +Maluesye+, 14/10, Malueseye.
  +mamelles+, 41/37, pappes.
  +maniere+, 4/22, manere.
  +manteaulx+, 8/30, mantellis.
  +maqueriaulx+, 12/6, makerell.
  +marastre+, 33/3, stepmodre.
  +marbre+, 40/12, marble.
  +marchans+, 21/17, marchans.
  +marchandyse+, 1/18, marchandise.
  +marchiet+, 14/31, market.
  +marcq+, 51/23, marcke.
  +mareschal+, 30/2, mareshall.
  +maries+, 9/15, maried.
  +maronners+, 11/39, maroners.
  +martirs+, 48/21, martris.
  +mary+, 5/33, husbonde.
  +masanges+, 10/37, meesen.
  +matere+, 9/13, matere.
  +matin+, 27/19, morning.
  +mattines+, 27/17, matynes.
  +mauldist+, 32/37, cursyd.
  +maussons+, 10/37, sparowes.
  +mauuais+, 40/20, euyll.
  +mayll+, 17/10, halfpeny.
  +mayns+, 4/21, handis.
  +mayson+, 1/8, house.
  +maysoncelle+, 40/30, litell hous.
  +medicine+, 20/8, medicines.
  +meffais+, 39/20, trespaces.
  +meillour+, 26/13, beste.
  +meistrise+, 43/27, maystrye.
  +membres+, 27/4, membres.
  +menacha+, 36/16, thretened.
  +menage+, 31/11, houshold.
  +menger+, 11/13, ete.
  +mengier+, 31/27, diner.
  +menison+, 41/39, blody flyxe.
  +menra+, 45/11, shall lede.
  +mente+, 13/19, mynte.
  +mer+, 1/11, see.
  +merceries+, 1/28, merceryes.
  +merchies+, 34/32, thanke.
  +merchis+, 18/11, _tres grand m._, right grete gramercy.
  +mercy+, 48/1, mercy.
  +merites+, 39/36, deseruynges.
  +merlens+, 12/5, whityng.
  +mermeil+, 14/14, rede (wyn).
  +merueille+, 32/31, meruaylle.
  +meschyne+, 28/5, maid.
  +mesle+, 41/21, medleth.
  +mesmes+, 30/35, our self.
  +mesmes+, 40/7, hym selfe.
  +messagier+, 45/1, messager.
  +messe+, 48/29, masse.
  +messureur+, 16/34, metar.
  +mestelon+, 44/22, mestelyn.
  +mestier+, 16/15, need.
  +mestiers+, 2/10, craftes.
  +mestrijer+, 43/25, mastrye.
  +mesure+, 40/15, moten.
  +mesures+, 7/24, mesures.
  +metauls+, 1/27, metals.
  +mettes+, 8/19, set.
  +meubles+, 1/8, catayllys.
  +meurs+, 9/34, maners.
  +meus+, 48/37, meuyd.
  +mie+, 15/17, 27/26, not.
  +miel+, 14/15, hony.
  +mies+, 14/15, mede.
  +mieuldre+, 36/32, grynde.
  +mieulx+, 10/17, better.
  +mire+, 5/14, reward.
  +mise+, 37/19, put.
  +misericors+, 47/39, mercyfull.
  +mite+, 51/31, myte.
  +mites+, 32/15, mytes.
  +moins+, 48/31, leste.
  +moisnes+, 24/1, monkes.
  +monde+, 22/26, world.
  +monnoye+, 17/18, moneye.
  +monnoyers+, 2/34, myntemakers.
  +montant+, 51/21, mountyng.
  +monte+, 17/11, cometh it to.
  +montes+, 14/32, goo vpon.
  +moret+, 14/38, morreey.
  +mormal+, 41/40, mormale.
  +moroit+, 11/32, shall deye.
  +morse+, 11/30, byten.
  +mort+, 48/13, deth.
  +morte+, 39/15, deed.
  +mortier+, 8/28, morter.
  +mostardier+, 42/21, mustardmaker.
  +mot+, 16/4, worde.
  +mottes+, 13/25, mottes. [_Motte_, little hill, high place.
      --Cotgrave.]
  +mouches+, 11/29, flies.
  +moulenier+, 36/27, myllar.
  +moules+, 12/20, muskles.
  +moult+, 26/6, moche.
  +mourdriers+, 43/12, murderers.
  +moures+, 13/6, morberies.
  +mourier+, 13/12, morbery tree.
  +moust+, 35/18, muste.
  +moustard+, 10/15, mustard.
  +mouue+, 30/26, styre.
  +moynes+, 2/5, monkes.
  +moys+, 27/37, monethes.
  +moytie+, 36/29, half.
  +mulets+, 12/6, molettis.
  +muletz+, 11/14, mules.
  +mur+, 42/33, walle.
  +muskadel+, 14/7, muscadel.
  +mydy+, 27/26, mydday.
  +mye+, 36/33, not.
  +mynuyt+, 27/33, mydnyght.
  +myse+, 3/9, gyuing oute, expenditure.

  +nappes+, 8/24, bordclothes.
  +naueaulx+, 13/36, rapes.
  +nauret+, 48/12, wounded.
  +nauyer+, 50/13, ship.
  +ne+, 27/21, ne.
  +neantmoins+, 32/36, neuertheless.
  +nef+, 50/16, shippe.
  +nennil+, 10/22, nay.
  +nepheux+, 6/6, neueus.
  +nesples+, 13/7, medliers.
  +nesplier+, 13/13, medliertree.
  +net+, 34/40, clene.
  +nettement+, 49/27, clenly.
  +neuds+, 32/30, cnoppes.
  +nieces+, 6/6, nieces.
  +nobles+, 17/33, nobles.
  +Noel+, 28/13, Cristemasse.
  +noix+, 13/6, notes.
  +nombre+, 50/34, nombre.
  +nommer+, 19/35, name.
  +none+, 27/27, none.
  +nonnains+, 24/9, nonnes.
  +noueaulx+, 17/26, newe.
  +nouuelles+, 29/31, tydynges.
  +nulle+, 10/33, no;
    29/17, (none) ony.
  +nuyts+, 27/16, nyghtes.
  +ny+, 3/28, not.
  +nye+, 46/32, denyeth.

  +oefs+, 12/31, egges.
  +Oesterlins+, 43/1, Esterlyngis.
  +offert+, 15/35, boden.
  +officiaulx+, 2/4, officials.
  +oignons+, 13/31, oynyons.
  +oistoirs+, 11/26, haukes.
  +olifans+, 11/19, olifaunts.
  +oliuier+, 13/14, olyuetree.
  +on+, 26/12, men.
  +onches+, 21/10, vnces.
  +oncques+, 32/21, neuer.
  +operacions+, 52/3, werkes.
  +or+, 6/16, now.
  +or+, 21/24, gold.
  +orains+, 46/20, whiler.
  +ordene+, 1/3, ordre.
  +ordonner+, 3/21, ordeyne.
  +oreilles+, 41/35, eres.
  +oreilliers+, 8/35, pelowes.
  +ores+, 6/33, now.
  +orfeures+, 2/14, goldsmythes.
  +orge+, 22/9, barlye.
  +orphenins+, 35/16, orphans.
  +orpiement+, 20/19, orpement.
  +ort+, 35/1, foull.
  +ortyes+, 13/28, nettles.
  +ostes+, 4/18, doo of.
  +ou+, 15/7, or.
  +oublies+, 13/2, forgeten.
  +ount+, 43/24, (they) have,
  +ouppe+, 13/20, hoppes, hops.
  +ourse+, 11/21, bere.
  +ouurages+, 7/16, werkes.
  +ouuries+, 21/29, wrought.
  +oyer+, 11/34, here.
  +oyles+, 20/9, oyles.
  +oyseusete+, 3/12, ydlenes.
  +oyseux+, 44/6, ydle.
  +oysters+, 12/20, oystres.
  +oystoires+, 43/38, gerfaucons.

  +paiels+, 7/7, pannes.
  +paiera+, 15/14, shall paye.
  +pain+, 9/4, brede.
  +pain+, 43/35, payne.
  +paintres+, 1/24, paynters.
  +painturers+, 2/25, paintours.
  +pair+, 16/12, pair.
  +paire de chausses+, 16/19, pair hosen.
  +paix+, 29/35, peas.
  +palefroy+, 45/30, palfreye.
  +palmier+, 13/15, palmetree.
  +paltocque+, 33/40, jaquet.
  +paons+, 11/2, pecoks.
  +paour+, 35/5, fere.
  +pape+, 22/19, pope.
  +papier+, 47/22, papier.
  +par+, 1/3, 16/22, by.
  +paradys+, 39/37, paradyse.
  +parastre+, 33/2, stepfadre.
  +parcemin+, 19/27, perchemyn.
  +parceminier+, 47/14, parchemyn-maker.
  +pardonne+, 39/19, forgyue.
  +pardons+, 28/33, pardon.
  +pardurable+, 52/5, euerlastyng.
  +parens+, 30/12, kynnesman.
  +parfacent+, 48/5, ful doo.
  +parfaicte+, 33/39, performed.
  +parlement+, 25/31, parlamente.
  +parles+, 27/36, speke.
  +parmi+, 8/26, thorugh.
  +parois+, 40/34, wallis.
  +parolles+, 5/12, wordes.
  +pars+, 38/40, partis.
  +partie+, 4/9, partie.
  +Pasques+, 28/13, Estre.
  +passe+, 35/22, passeth.
  +pastees+, 12/37, pasteyes.
  +pastesiers+, 2/34, pybakers.
  +patards+, 17/23, plackes.
  +paternosters+, 46/3, bedes.
  +paternostrier+, 46/1, paternoster-maker.
  +patriarces+, 48/22, patriarkis.
  +patron+, 23/38, patron.
  +payes+, 48/36, paye.
  +pays+, 17/40, contre.
  +peaulx+, 1/21, skynnes.
  +pecheurs+, 48/1, synnars.
  +pechies+, 39/20, synnes.
  +pelerinages+, 48/35, pylgremages.
  +pelice+, 46/21, pylche.
  +pelletiere+, 46/23, pilchemaker.
  +penance+, 48/5, penaunce.
  +pend+, 43/16, hange.
  +pendoyrs+, 21/39, pendants.
  +peneuse+, 28/28, paynful.
  +pennes+, 39/6, pennes.
  +penses+, 10/2, thynke.
  +Pentechoste+, 28/14, Whitsontid.
  +perche+, 8/29, perche.
  +perderes+, 15/39, (ye) shold lese.
  +pere+, 3/17, fadre.
  +peril+, 48/13, peryll.
  +perir+, 48/10, perysshe.
  +periroyent+, 37/17, shold perisshe.
  +perques+, 12/14, perches.
  +perseuerance+, 52/2, perseueraunce.
  +persin+, 13/32, persely.
  +pertris+, 11/1, partrichs.
  +pesant+, 31/37, weyeng.
  +pesques+, 13/7, pesshes.
  +pesquier+, 13/12, pesshe-tree.
  +pestiel+, 8/28, pestyll.
  +peu+, 36/34, lytyll.
  +peult+, 6/19, may.  [[error for 6/20]]
  +peuple+, 34/4, peple.
  +piece+, 47/8, pece.
  +piecha+, 5/1, in longe tyme.
  +piel+, 47/15, skyn.
  +pierre+, 19/14, stone.
  +pies+, 8/18, feet.
  +pieure+, 44/27, shrewest.
  +pigna+, 32/21, kembyth (_pres._ for _past_).
  +pigneresses+, 2/15, kempsters.
  +pintes+, 7/21, pintes.
  +pis+, 38/1, werse.
  +pite+, 33/11, pite.
  +piuions+, 10/39, pygeons.
  +placqua+, 40/35, daubed.
  +placqueur+, 40/36, dawber.
  +plain+, 31/7, plainly.
  +plaindes+, 31/12, (ye) playne (you).
  +plainement+, 17/6, playnly.
  +plaist+, 5/6, plaise.
  +plates+, 33/33, _vnes p._, a plate (armour).
  +platteaux+, 7/30, platers.
  +playderay+, 47/13, (I) shall plete.
  +playes+, 41/22, woundes.
  +plays+, 12/3, plays.
  +plein+, 26/19, full.
  +plente+, 8/23, plente.
  +plomb+, 21/22, leed.
  +plouuier+, 10/35, plouier.
  +ployes+, 17/2, folde.
  +plummes+, 6/34, fetheris.
  +plus+, 4/25.
  +plusiers+, 18/25, many.
  +pluyt+, 50/22, rayneth.
  +poes+, 4/23, may ye.
  +poillaillerie+, 10/30, pultrie.
  +point+, 39/24, paynteth.
  +point+, 5/18, nothyng.
  +pointe+, 33/29, poynte.
  +pointurer+, 34/19, paynter.
  +poires+, 13/4, peres.
  +poise+, 19/12, waye.
  +poise+, 46/8, _ce p. moy_, wo is me.
  +poissonners+, 2/22, fysshmongers.
  +poit+, 20/22, pycche.
  +poiure+, 10/28, pepre.
  +pommes+, 13/4, apples.
  +pommier+, 13/11, apple tree.
  +ponce+, 47/21, pomyce.
  +pont+, 49/9, brigge.
  +porc+, 10/12, porke.
  +porc de mer+, 12/2, pourpays.
  +porciaux+, 40/22, hogges.
  +poree+, 8/14, wortes.
  +porions+, 13/31, porreette.
  +porke+, 26/30, swyne.
  +poroye+, 11/7, mowe.
  +porrier+, 13/11, pere tree.
  +porte+, 27/10, gate.
  +porte+, 32/3, born (_in childbirth_).
  +portera+, 34/37, shall bere.
  +pot+, 8/4, pot.
  +potages+, 1/16, potages.
  +pouchins+, 10/32, chekens.
  +poudres+, 20/5, poudres.
  +poulaillier+, 44/1, pulter.
  +poulle+, 10/32, poullet.
  +poulletis+, 10/31, poullettis.
  +poumon+, 26/28, longhe.
  +pour+, 1/3, for to.
  +pourcelaine+, 13/34, porselane.
  +pourchacies+, 38/37, pourchaced.
  +poures+, 6/35, poure.
  +pourpointier+, 33/38, doblet maker.
  +pourpoints+, 8/32, doblettes.
  +pourries+, 11/12, (ye) may.
  +pourroient+, 29/19, (they) myght.
  +poutrains+, 11/15, coltes.
  +poyle+, 27/7, pylle.
  +poyntes+, 6/38, paynted.
  +poys+, 13/39, pesen.
  +poyssons+, 1/11, fysshes.
  +prayel+, 45/18, pryelle.
  +prebstres+, 23/29, prestes.
  +prelats+, 2/2, prelates.
  +premier+, 4/16, first.
  +premierment+, 1/5, fyrst.
  +prenderes+, 16/8, (you) shall take.
  +prenge+, 5/22, (I) take.
  +prescheurs+, 24/6, prechers.
  +presente+, 35/19, profred.
  +prest+, 44/39, redy.
  +preste+, 30/31, lente.
  +prets+, 13/21, medowes.
  +preudhomme+, 27/15, wyse man.
  +preuileges+, 36/37, preuyleges.
  +preuostie+, 30/11, prouostye.
  +preuosts+, 23/26, prouostes.
  +prijez+, 39/16, praye.
  +prime+, 27/24, prime.
  +princes+, 2/7, princes.
  +princesse+, 24/39, princesse.
  +prions+, 26/15, (we) pray.
  +pris+, 26/20, pris.
  +prison+, 36/13, prison.
  +prisonniers+, 35/14, prisoners.
  +priues+, 1/10, tame.
  +procession+, 19/9, procession.
  +procureur+, 47/9, proctour.
  +promise+, 25/30, promysed.
  +prophetes+, 48/21, prophetes.
  +prouffyt+, 4/7, prouffyt.
  +prouffytable+, 1/2, prouffytable.
  +prounes+, 13/4, plommes.
  +prounier+, 13/13, plomtree.
  +pryeurs+, 23/27, pryours.
  +psalmes+, 39/4, salmes.
  +psaultiers+, 39/1, sawters.
  +puis ... puis+, 25/18, syth ... sith.
  +puise+, 4/26, may.
  +puissance+, 22/33, myghty.
  +pute+, 46/16, stynketh.
  +pys+, 30/34, werse.
  +pys+, 41/37, breste.

  +quadrant+, 51/31, ferdyng.
  +quancques+, 50/31, what someuer.
  +Quaremien+, 28/24, Shroftyde.
  +quart+, 7/23, quarte.
  +quartaines+, 42/2, quartayn.
  +quarters+, 21/8, quarters.
  +quassies+, 35/8, hurte.
  +que+, 16/14, 15, as;
    1/4, whiche.
  +querir+, 35/21, to fecche.
  +querre+, 26/23, fecche.
  +querson+, 13/35, kersses.
  +querue+, 46/29, plowh.
  +queuerchief+, 8/36, keuerchief.
  +quidies+, 16/14, (ye) wene (_see_ cuide).
  +quierques+, 21/13, lastes.
  +quoy+, 19/22, wher(of).

  +racompter+, 5/5, to telle.
  +ralongier+, 47/31, to lengthe.
  +rammonier+, 46/6, brusshemaker.
  +rammons+, 46/7, brusshes.
  +raportes+, 3/10, brynge.
  +rastons+, 12/36, printed cakes;
    13/1, eyrekakis.
    [_Raston_, m., a fashion of round and high Tart, made of butter,
    egges, and cheese. --Cotgrave.]
  +rayes+, 12/4, thornbaks.
  +raysons+, 3/2, resons.
  +recepte+, 3/9, recyte.
  +recepueur+, 44/35, receyuour.
  +recomandes+, 5/36, recommaunde.
  +rees+, 47/18, shauen.
  +refouller+, 34/16, full agayn.
  +refuse+, 28/38, (I) reffuse.
  +regarde+, 25/33, beholde.
  +regratter+, 34/16, carde agayn.
  +relief+, 9/7, leuynge.
  +remauldis+, 32/38, cursyd agayn.
  +remaysonnes+, 34/20, howsed agayn.
  +remede+, 48/14, remedye.
  +remesurer+, 17/8, mete agayn.
  +remettes+, 4/21, sette (it) on agayn.
  +remues+, 34/20, remeuyd.
  +rendre+, 37/1, yelde.
  +renommees+, 40/19, renomed.
  +renteez+, 23/30, rented.
  +repentance+, 48/3, repentaunce.
  +reposeray+, 22/13, _ ie men r._, I shall reste me.
  +reprouua+, 33/4, repreuud.
  +requerre+, 44/36, requyre.
  +resambloient+, 9/38, (that they) resemble.
  +rescourer+, 34/17, skowre agayn.
  +respaulme+, 26/37, spoylle.
  +respondes+, 5/23, ansuere.
  +respyt+, 30/4, respyte.
  +retenir+, 50/39, reteyne.
  +reubans+, 36/10, rybans.
  +reuendra+, 27/25, shall come agayn.
  +reynards+, 11/18, foxes.
  +riche+, 4/5, riche.
  +riens+, 16/3, thyng.
  +robbeurs+, 43/13, robbers.
  +robes+, 16/12, gounes.
  +roches+, 12/15, roches.
  +roels+, 43/18, wheles.
  +roisin+, 13/8, reysins.
  +Romenye+, 14/10, Romeneye.
  +rompture+, 41/28, brekynge.
  +roses+, 13/18, roses.
  +rosty+, 10/20, rosted.
  +rouchin+, 45/29, coursour.
  +rouges+, 12/5, rogettis.
  +roussignoulx+, 10/36, nyghtyngalis.
  +rouwet+, 32/29, whele.
  +roy+, 22/28, kyng.
  +royames+, 29/37, royames.
  +royaulx+, 17/33, ryallis.
  +royet+, 14/39, raye.
  +roynes+, 2/6, quenes.
  +roysonnablement+, 3/23, resonably.
  +rues+, 4/10, streetes.
  +ryuiers+, 1/12, riuers.

  +sac+, 36/34, sack.
  +sachies+, 5/16, knowe.
  +sacque+, 31/20, drawe.
  +sacrament+, 28/30, sacrament.
  +saffran+, 19/39, saffran.
  +sage+, 29/18, wyse.
  +sagettes+, 36/25, arowes.
  +saing+, 46/18, sayme.
  +sainte+, 3/19, holy.
  +sainture+, 21/27, corse.
  +salle+, 10/14, salted.
  +sallieres+, 7/32, sallyers.
  +saluant+, 4/27, salewyng.
  +saluer+, 1/7, grete.
  +salutations+, 6/14, salutations.
  +salutz+, 17/34, salews.
  +samblance+, 47/35, lykenes.
  +sarges+, 6/37, sarges.
  +saulge+, 13/33, sauge.
  +saulmon+, 12/17, samon.
  +saulses+, 8/26, sauses.
  +saulx+, 13/15, wylough.
  +sauns+, 14/25, withoute.
  +sauoyr+, 6/17, _cest a s._, that is to saye.  [[error for 6/18]]
  +sausserons+, 7/31, saussers.
  +sauuages+, 1/10, wylde.
  +sauue+, 17/3, sauf.
  +sauuete+, 50/18, sauete.
  +saye+, 14/40, saye.
  +scaues+, 4/8, knowe.
  +scauroye+, 11/37, _je ne s._, I ne wote not.
  +seal+, 45/4, seal.
  +seigneur+, 5/37, lorde.
  +sel+, 20/21, salte.
  +selle+, 25/28, sadel.
  +sellees+, 45/4, sealed.
  +semaile+, 20/10, feldeseed.
  +semble+, 16/40, semeth.
  +senestre+, 49/12, lyfte.
  +sengler+, 10/26, wylde boor.
  +sens+, 15/17, wysedom.
  +sensieuent+, 21/21, folowe.
  +sepmaine+, 28/28, weke.
  +serf+, 10/27, harte.
  +sergeans+, 43/32, sergeants.
  +serouge+, 29/13, cosen alyed.
  +serpens+, 11/28, serpentes.
  +serruriers+, 2/36, lokyers.
  +sert+, 48/16, serueth.
  +seruans+, 10/1, seruaunts.
  +seruice+, 37/7, seruise.
  +seruoise+, 14/16, ale.
  +sestier+, 7/19, sextier.
  +seuffre+, 50/30, suffreth.
  +seure+, 8/3, sure.
  +si que+, 33/11, so that.
  +siet+, 41/1, sitteth.
  +sieu+, 20/30, siewet;
    47/7, talow.
  +signes+, 39/6, swannes (_see_ cignes).
  +singes+, 11/20, apes.
  +sire+, 4/24, syre.
  +soer+, 35/3, suster.
  +soif+, 45/19, hegge.
  +soille+, 22/9, rye.
  +solas+, 29/7, solace.
  +solliers+, 6/28, loftes.
  +soloit+, 34/21, was woned.
  +solz+, 44/9, shelyngs.
  +somme+, 3/10, somme.
  +sommonce+, 47/10, sommonce.
  +sommondre+, 47/11, somone.
  +sorees+, 12/9, reed.
  +sorles+, 20/34, shoes.
  +souef+, 13/17, suete.
  +souffisante+, 42/29, suffysaunte.
  +souffist+, 17/7, suffyseth.
  +souhaidera+, 46/39, shall weeshe.
  +soulz+, 3/8, shelynges.
  +sounee+, 30/15, sowned.
  +soupperay+, 29/4, (I) shall souppe.
  +sourcorps+, 8/30, frockes.
  +sourcote+, 16/16, surcote.
  +sourplis+, 42/12, surplys.
  +souuenir+, 50/24, bythynke.
  +souuent+, 13/24, ofte.
  +soye+, 21/27, silke.
  +stamine+, 8/26, strayner.
  +strelins+, 51/22, sterlings.
  +substaunce+, 30/25, substance.
  +suera+, 35/3, shall suete.
  +suffiroit+, 30/40, shold suffyse.
  +sugles+, 12/4, sooles.
  +surgien+, 41/20, surgyan.
  +suz+, 6/35, on.
  +sy+, 14/30, so.
  +sydre+, 14/18, syther.
  +synon+, 6/20, withoute.
  +sys+, 45/34, seten.

  +table+, 1/1, table.
  +tailleur+, 34/1, taillour.
  +taillier+, 8/11, to cutte.
  +tainctures+, 1/26, colours.
  +taindre+, 34/24, dye.
  +talent+, 32/36, luste.
  +tammis+, 38/22, temmesis.
  +tanne+, 46/13, taweth.
  +tant+, 15/18, so moche.
  +tantost+, 34/28, anon.
  +tapites+, 6/37, tapytes.
  +tasses+, 21/32, tasses.
  +tauerne+, 26/21, tauerne.
  +tauernier+, 35/17, tauerner.
  +taye+, 6/2, beldame.
  +tayon+, 6/2, belfadre.
  +tel+, 15/22, somme.
  +tele+, 10/6, suche.
  +teliers+, 2/22, lynweuers.
  +temporalite+, 45/40, temporalte.
  +temps+, 27/9, tyme.
  +tenchant+, 32/33, chydyng.
  +teneurs+, 2/35, tawyers.
  +tenez+, 17/17, holde.
  +tenques+, 12/14, tenches.
  +tenres+, 11/11, tendre.
  +tercheul+, 14/21, wurte.
  +termes+, 2/12, termes.
  +terre+, 40/35, erthe.
  +testamens+, 36/39, testamentis.
  +teste+, 26/31, hede.
  +tesyque+, 41/40, tesyke.
  +theologie+, 25/5, diuinite.
  +tieng+, 16/38, holde.
  +tiercaines+, 42/2, tercian.
  +tierce+, 27/25, tyerse.
  +tieulles+, 2/26, tiles.
  +tigneuse+, 36/5, scallyd.
  +tisserans+, 2/14, weuers.
  +toilles+, 14/24, lynnenclothis.
  +tollenier+, 44/29, tollar.
  +tondeurs+, 2/15, sheremen.
  +tonlieu+, 44/33, tolle.
  +tonne+, 50/21, thondreth.
  +tonniaulx+, 21/11, barellis.
  +tors+, 11/14, bulles.
  +toudis+, 29/11, alleway.
  +tourbes+, 8/7, turues.
  +touriers+, 2/31, kepars of prisons.
  +tournoys+, 25/1, tournemens.
  +tourterolles+, 10/40, turtellis.
  +tousiours+, 9/23, alleway.
  +tout+, 1/3, all.
  +touwailles+, 8/24, towellis.
  +traisme+, 38/13, woef.
  +trait+, 26/26, draught.
  +transitorie+, 52/4, transitorie.
  +trauwet+, 34/15, hooled.
  +trayent+, 36/26, (they) shote.
  +traynnon+ (= _traîne on_), 43/17, be drawen.
  +trenchores+, 7/32, trenchours.
  +trepiet+, 8/5, treuet.
  +tresoier+, 9/3, cupbort.
  +tresour+, 22/30, tresour.
  +trespassee+, 39/15, passed.
  +tresquand+, 33/14, syth whan.
  +treuue on+, 7/28, men fynd.
  +triacle+, 11/31, triacle.
  +triaclier+, 31/38, triacle boxe.
  +trieues+, 29/38, triews.
  +Trinite+, 1/5, Trinite.
  +trippes+, 26/27, trippes.
  +trop+, 5/5, ouermoche.
  +trouuer+, 1/3, to fynde.
  +tues+, 35/7, slayn.
  +tymon+, 13/33, tyme.
  +tystre+, 31/40, weue.

  +va+, 10/8, goo.
  +vaches+, 12/29, kien.
  +vaire+, 46/21, graye.
  +vairriers+, 2/36, makers of greywerke.
  +valent+, 17/25, be worth.
  +valeur+, 4/17, valure.
  +valleton+, 33/5, boye.
  +vans+, 38/20, vannes.
  +vanter+, 30/14, auaunte.
  +vassiaulx+, 21/12, vessellis.
  +vault+, 15/7, is worth.
  +veers+, 11/29, wormes.
  +veiller+, 27/21, wakyng.
  +vendues+, 4/5, solde.
  +vengance+, 37/26, vengeaunce.
  +venimeuses+, 11/27, venemous.
  +vent+, 40/28, wynde.
  +venyson+, 10/25, venyson.
  +veoir+, 32/31, see.
  +verde+, 10/13, grene.
  +verdures+, 13/22, verdures.
  +verge+, 9/32, rodde.
  +verius+, 42/23, veriuse.
  +vermeil+, 14/37; +vermeilles+, 13/18; reed, red.
  +vernis+, 20/19, vernysshe.
  +verses+, 27/5, gyue (us wyne).
  +vesches+, 22/10, vessches.
  +vespres+, 27/29, euensonge.
  +vestures+, 8/29, clothes.
  +vesues+, 48/24, wedowes.
  +veult+, 6/29, wyll.
  +vey+, 5/1, (I) haue seen.
  +veytier+, 45/9, carier.
  +viande+, 9/5, mete.
  +vie+, 31/17, lyf.
  +viegne+, 27/27, come (_passage mistranslated_).
  +viel+, 10/19, calfe.
  +vierge+, 48/17, mayde.
  +vieswarier+, 34/13, vpholster.
  +vieulx+, 17/24, olde.
  +vigneron+, 46/37, wyneman.
  +vignes+, 46/38, vyneyerd.
  +ville+, 3/1, toune.
  +villonnie+, 29/1, vylonye.
  +vin+, 6/29, wyne.
  +vinaigre+, 42/22, vynegre.
  +virgoingne+, 9/21, shame.
  +viscounte+, 24/30, vycounte.
  +visette+, 35/13, visiteth.
  +vist+, 22/30, lyueth.
  +viure+, 29/11, lyue.
  +vng+, 16/4, one.
  +vngles+, 42/1, nayles.
  +vnguements+, 41/24, oynementis.
  +voir+, 15/12, ye truly;
    +voire+, 27/30.
  +voire+, 46/4, glas;  [[error for 46/5]]
    +voires+, 9/9, glases.
  +voirier+, 34/30, glasyer.
  +voisins+, 9/19, neyghbours.
  +volente+, 10/5, wyll.
  +volentiers+, 5/10, gladly.
  +vouldra+, 1/4, _on v._, men wylle.
  +voy+, 37/35, I sawe.
  +voyage+, 48/38, viage.
  +voye+, 50/19, waye.
  +voyette+, 49/11, lytill waye.
  +vraye+, 48/4, verry.
  +vrayement+, 4/7, truly.
  +vrine+, 34/37, vrine.
  +vsages+, 4/28, vsages.
  +vsuriers+, 2/25, vsuriers.
  +vylain+, 30/8, chorle.

  +wasteletz+, 13/1, wastles.
  +wydecos+, 10/36, wodecoks.

  +ydropison+, 41/39, dropesye.
  +yeux+, 41/34, eyen.
  +ypocras+, 14/12, ypocras.
  +yrons+, 39/21, (we) shall goo.
  +ysnel+, 4/15, swyft.
  +ysope+, 13/33, ysope.
  +ysseray+, 49/5, shall (I) goo out.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Format of the e-text:

The page numbers shown as bracketed [Sidenotes] refer to Caxton. French
and English lines were printed in parallel columns; they are shown here
in pairs, with different indentation. Line numbers are in EETS-standard
multiples of 4. In the original book, variations in line number were for
mechanical reasons such as unusually long lines or to avoid collision
with line-end notes; they have been regularized for this e-text. To
preserve line numbering, all line breaks have been retained.

Numbered footnotes were printed in the nearest available space. For
the e-text they have generally been moved to the end of the phrase or
sentence. Numbering is unchanged; on pages with multiple notes, the
French (left) side was numbered before the English (right) side,
leading to some apparent inconsistencies.

Boldface initials are shown with a single + before the word; large drop
capitals are shown with two ++. Mid-word italics, representing expanded
contractions, are shown in {braces}. Elsewhere, +boldface+ and _italics_
are shown conventionally. Superscripts are shown with carets ^.

Except for [Sidenote] and similar markers, single brackets are in the
original.


Errors and Inconsistencies (noted by transcriber):

Introduction

  Il donna [_sic_] a chescun sa mesure.  [[“sic” notation in original]]

Main Text

_Possible errors addressed in the Editor’s Notes (end of Introduction)
are not listed here. All names in Chr- (Christopher, Christine...) are
spelled “xprifor” and similar, with “xpr” for Greek ΧΡ._

  2.10 Et des mestiers... /And of craftes... 26
    [[error for 25: same as preceding Contents item]]
  4.4 Which to hym shalbe good to be bouȝt
    [[this lone yogh ȝ is in the original]]
  23.34 That isin the world  [[spacing unchanged]]
  30.8 Benoit le vylain / Benet the chorle
  31.26 Beatrix le lauendier / Beatrice the lauendre
    [[both sets of initials as shown: expected boldface]]
  49.7 Prenderay ie mon chemyn?’”
      Shall I take my way?’”
    [[quotation marks printed as shown: editorial error?]]

Vocabulary Lists

_As noted above, numbering errors in the vocabulary lists are shown
inline in [[double brackets]]. Not all spelling differences between
Index and body text are listed._

English

  +dedicace+, parish festival, 46/2.  [[body text has “dedicacion”]]
  +fatte+, vat, cask, 26/19.  [[. missing]]
  +hyndecalf+, fawn, 10/27.
  +Janiver+, January, 27/39.
    [[no break between H and I/J]]
  +stewes+: see +styewe+.  [[no entry for “styewe” (42.28)]]
  +suete+, sweet, 13/17, 35/3.
    [[printed as shown, but in 35/3, “suete” seems to mean “sweat”]]
  +thourgh+, through, 8/26.
    [[body text and French vocabulary have “thorugh”]]

French

  +suffiroit+, 30/40, shold suffyse.
    [[spelled “souffiroit” in body text]]





End of Project Gutenberg's Dialogues in French and English, by William Caxton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIALOGUES IN FRENCH AND ENGLISH ***

***** This file should be named 29214-0.txt or 29214-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/2/1/29214/

Produced by Louise Hope, Greg Lindahl and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
